However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on hisfirst entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the mindsof the surrounding families, that he is considered the rightful propertyof some one or other of their daughters."My dear Mr. Bennet," said his lady to him one day, "have you heard thatNetherfield Park is let at last?"Mr. Bennet replied that he had not."But it is," returned she; "for Mrs. Long has just been here, and shetold me all about it."Mr. Bennet made no answer."Do you not want to know who has taken it?" cried his wife impatiently."_You_ want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it."This was invitation enough."Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is takenby a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he camedown on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so muchdelighted with it, that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately; that heis to take possession before Michaelmas, and some of his servants are tobe in the house by the end of next week.""What is his name?""Bingley.""Is he married or single?""Oh! Single, my dear, to be sure! A single man of large fortune; four orfive thousand a year. What a fine thing for our girls!""How so? How can it affect them?""My dear Mr. Bennet," replied his wife, "how can you be so tiresome! Youmust know that I am thinking of his marrying one of them.""Is that his design in settling here?""Design! Nonsense, how can you talk so! But it is very likely that he_may_ fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him assoon as he comes.""I see no occasion for that. You and the girls may go, or you may sendthem by themselves, which perhaps will be still better, for as you areas handsome as any of them, Mr. Bingley may like you the best of theparty.""My dear, you flatter me. I certainly _have_ had my share of beauty, butI do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now. When a woman has fivegrown-up daughters, she ought to give over thinking of her own beauty.""In such cases, a woman has not often much beauty to think of.""But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr. Bingley when he comes intothe neighbourhood.""It is more than I engage for, I assure you.""But consider your daughters. Only think what an establishment it wouldbe for one of them. Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined togo, merely on that account, for in general, you know, they visit nonewcomers. Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for _us_ tovisit him if you do not.""You are over-scrupulous, surely. I dare say Mr. Bingley will be veryglad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of myhearty consent to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girls; thoughI must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy.""I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit better than theothers; and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half sogood-humoured as Lydia. But you are always giving _her_ the preference.""They have none of them much to recommend them," replied he; "they areall silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more ofquickness than her sisters.""Mr. Bennet, how _can_ you abuse your own children in such a way? Youtake delight in vexing me. You have no compassion for my poor nerves.""You mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect for your nerves. Theyare my old friends. I have heard you mention them with considerationthese last twenty years at least.""Ah, you do not know what I suffer.""But I hope you will get over it, and live to see many young men of fourthousand a year come into the neighbourhood.""It will be no use to us, if twenty such should come, since you will notvisit them.""Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty, I will visit themall."Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour,reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three-and-twenty years hadbeen insufficient to make his wife understand his character. _Her_ mindwas less difficult to develop. She was a woman of mean understanding,little information, and uncertain temper. When she was discontented,she fancied herself nervous. The business of her life was to get herdaughters married; its solace was visiting and news.Chapter 2Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr. Bingley. Hehad always intended to visit him, though to the last always assuringhis wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit waspaid she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosed in the followingmanner. Observing his second daughter employed in trimming a hat, hesuddenly addressed her with:"I hope Mr. Bingley will like it, Lizzy.""We are not in a way to know _what_ Mr. Bingley likes," said her motherresentfully, "since we are not to visit.""But you forget, mamma," said Elizabeth, "that we shall meet him at theassemblies, and that Mrs. Long promised to introduce him.""I do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing. She has two niecesof her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinionof her.""No more have I," said Mr. Bennet; "and I am glad to find that you donot depend on her serving you."Mrs. Bennet deigned not to make any reply, but, unable to containherself, began scolding one of her daughters."Don't keep coughing so, Kitty, for Heaven's sake! Have a littlecompassion on my nerves. You tear them to pieces.""Kitty has no discretion in her coughs," said her father; "she timesthem ill.""I do not cough for my own amusement," replied Kitty fretfully. "When isyour next ball to be, Lizzy?""To-morrow fortnight.""Aye, so it is," cried her mother, "and Mrs. Long does not come backtill the day before; so it will be impossible for her to introduce him,for she will not know him herself.""Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduceMr. Bingley to _her_.""Impossible, Mr. Bennet, impossible, when I am not acquainted with himmyself; how can you be so teasing?""I honour your circumspection. A fortnight's acquaintance is certainlyvery little. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of afortnight. But if _we_ do not venture somebody else will; and after all,Mrs. Long and her neices must stand their chance; and, therefore, asshe will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I willtake it on myself."The girls stared at their father. Mrs. Bennet said only, "Nonsense,nonsense!""What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?" cried he. "Doyou consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid onthem, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you _there_. What say you,Mary? For you are a young lady of deep reflection, I know, and readgreat books and make extracts."Mary wished to say something sensible, but knew not how."While Mary is adjusting her ideas," he continued, "let us return to Mr.Bingley.""I am sick of Mr. Bingley," cried his wife."I am sorry to hear _that_; but why did not you tell me that before? IfI had known as much this morning I certainly would not have calledon him. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, wecannot escape the acquaintance now."The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished; that of Mrs.Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though, when the first tumult of joywas over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all thewhile."How good it was in you, my dear Mr. Bennet! But I knew I shouldpersuade you at last. I was sure you loved your girls too well toneglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! and it is such agood joke, too, that you should have gone this morning and never said aword about it till now.""Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose," said Mr. Bennet; and,as he spoke, he left the room, fatigued with the raptures of his wife."What an excellent father you have, girls!" said she, when the door wasshut. "I do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness;or me, either, for that matter. At our time of life it is not sopleasant, I can tell you, to be making new acquaintances every day; butfor your sakes, we would do anything. Lydia, my love, though you _are_the youngest, I dare say Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the nextball.""Oh!" said Lydia stoutly, "I am not afraid; for though I _am_ theyoungest, I'm the tallest."The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he wouldreturn Mr. Bennet's visit, and determining when they should ask him todinner.Chapter 3Not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her fivedaughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw from herhusband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley. They attacked himin various ways--with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, anddistant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all, and they were atlast obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour,Lady Lucas. Her report was highly favourable. Sir William had beendelighted with him. He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremelyagreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assemblywith a large party. Nothing could be more delightful! To be fond ofdancing was a certain step towards falling in love; and very livelyhopes of Mr. Bingley's heart were entertained."If I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield,"said Mrs. Bennet to her husband, "and all the others equally wellmarried, I shall have nothing to wish for."In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet's visit, and sat aboutten minutes with him in his library. He had entertained hopes of beingadmitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty he hadheard much; but he saw only the father. The ladies were somewhat morefortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining from an upperwindow that he wore a blue coat, and rode a black horse.An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards dispatched; and alreadyhad Mrs. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to herhousekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all. Mr. Bingleywas obliged to be in town the following day, and, consequently, unableto accept the honour of their invitation, etc. Mrs. Bennet was quitedisconcerted. She could not imagine what business he could have in townso soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and she began to fear thathe might be always flying about from one place to another, and neversettled at Netherfield as he ought to be. Lady Lucas quieted her fearsa little by starting the idea of his being gone to London only to geta large party for the ball; and a report soon followed that Mr. Bingleywas to bring twelve ladies and seven gentlemen with him to the assembly.The girls grieved over such a number of ladies, but were comforted theday before the ball by hearing, that instead of twelve he brought onlysix with him from London--his five sisters and a cousin. And whenthe party entered the assembly room it consisted of only fivealtogether--Mr. Bingley, his two sisters, the husband of the eldest, andanother young man.Mr. Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike; he had a pleasantcountenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sisters were fine women,with an air of decided fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr. Hurst, merelylooked the gentleman; but his friend Mr. Darcy soon drew the attentionof the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien, andthe report which was in general circulation within five minutesafter his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The gentlemenpronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the ladies declared hewas much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and he was looked at with greatadmiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgustwhich turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to beproud; to be above his company, and above being pleased; and not allhis large estate in Derbyshire could then save him from having a mostforbidding, disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be comparedwith his friend.Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principalpeople in the room; he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance,was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of givingone himself at Netherfield. Such amiable qualities must speak forthemselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mr. Darcy dancedonly once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, declined beingintroduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening inwalking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party.His character was decided. He was the proudest, most disagreeable manin the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there again.Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs. Bennet, whose dislike ofhis general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by hishaving slighted one of her daughters.Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sitdown for two dances; and during part of that time, Mr. Darcy had beenstanding near enough for her to hear a conversation between him and Mr.Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes, to press his friendto join it."Come, Darcy," said he, "I must have you dance. I hate to see youstanding about by yourself in this stupid manner. You had much betterdance.""I certainly shall not. You know how I detest it, unless I amparticularly acquainted with my partner. At such an assembly as thisit would be insupportable. Your sisters are engaged, and there is notanother woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me tostand up with.""I would not be so fastidious as you are," cried Mr. Bingley, "for akingdom! Upon my honour, I never met with so many pleasant girls inmy life as I have this evening; and there are several of them you seeuncommonly pretty.""_You_ are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room," said Mr.Darcy, looking at the eldest Miss Bennet."Oh! She is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld! But there is oneof her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and Idare say very agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce you.""Which do you mean?" and turning round he looked for a moment atElizabeth, till catching her eye, he withdrew his own and coldly said:"She is tolerable, but not handsome enough to tempt _me_; I am in nohumour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slightedby other men. You had better return to your partner and enjoy hersmiles, for you are wasting your time with me."Mr. Bingley followed his advice. Mr. Darcy walked off; and Elizabethremained with no very cordial feelings toward him. She told the story,however, with great spirit among her friends; for she had a lively,playful disposition, which delighted in anything ridiculous.The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family. Mrs.Bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the Netherfieldparty. Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had beendistinguished by his sisters. Jane was as much gratified by this asher mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth felt Jane'spleasure. Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the mostaccomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had beenfortunate enough never to be without partners, which was all that theyhad yet learnt to care for at a ball. They returned, therefore, in goodspirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which theywere the principal inhabitants. They found Mr. Bennet still up. Witha book he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had agood deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raisedsuch splendid expectations. He had rather hoped that his wife's views onthe stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found out that he had adifferent story to hear."Oh! my dear Mr. Bennet," as she entered the room, "we have had a mostdelightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you had been there.Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it. Everybody said how wellshe looked; and Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful, and danced withher twice! Only think of _that_, my dear; he actually danced with hertwice! and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a secondtime. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so vexed to see him standup with her! But, however, he did not admire her at all; indeed, nobodycan, you know; and he seemed quite struck with Jane as she was goingdown the dance. So he inquired who she was, and got introduced, andasked her for the two next. Then the two third he danced with Miss King,and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane again,and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the _Boulanger_--""If he had had any compassion for _me_," cried her husband impatiently,"he would not have danced half so much! For God's sake, say no more ofhis partners. Oh that he had sprained his ankle in the first dance!""Oh! my dear, I am quite delighted with him. He is so excessivelyhandsome! And his sisters are charming women. I never in my life sawanything more elegant than their dresses. I dare say the lace upon Mrs.Hurst's gown--"Here she was interrupted again. Mr. Bennet protested against anydescription of finery. She was therefore obliged to seek another branchof the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit and someexaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy."But I can assure you," she added, "that Lizzy does not lose much by notsuiting _his_ fancy; for he is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not atall worth pleasing. So high and so conceited that there was no enduringhim! He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so verygreat! Not handsome enough to dance with! I wish you had been there, mydear, to have given him one of your set-downs. I quite detest the man."Chapter 4When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious inher praise of Mr. Bingley before, expressed to her sister just how verymuch she admired him."He is just what a young man ought to be," said she, "sensible,good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners!--so muchease, with such perfect good breeding!""He is also handsome," replied Elizabeth, "which a young man oughtlikewise to be, if he possibly can. His character is thereby complete.""I was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time. Idid not expect such a compliment.""Did not you? I did for you. But that is one great difference betweenus. Compliments always take _you_ by surprise, and _me_ never. Whatcould be more natural than his asking you again? He could not helpseeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other womanin the room. No thanks to his gallantry for that. Well, he certainly isvery agreeable, and I give you leave to like him. You have liked many astupider person.""Dear Lizzy!""Oh! you are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general.You never see a fault in anybody. All the world are good and agreeablein your eyes. I never heard you speak ill of a human being in yourlife.""I would not wish to be hasty in censuring anyone; but I always speakwhat I think.""I know you do; and it is _that_ which makes the wonder. With _your_good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense ofothers! Affectation of candour is common enough--one meets with iteverywhere. But to be candid without ostentation or design--to take thegood of everybody's character and make it still better, and say nothingof the bad--belongs to you alone. And so you like this man's sisters,too, do you? Their manners are not equal to his.""Certainly not--at first. But they are very pleasing women when youconverse with them. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother, and keephis house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charmingneighbour in her."Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced; their behaviour atthe assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with morequickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister,and with a judgement too unassailed by any attention to herself, shewas very little disposed to approve them. They were in fact very fineladies; not deficient in good humour when they were pleased, nor in thepower of making themselves agreeable when they chose it, but proud andconceited. They were rather handsome, had been educated in one of thefirst private seminaries in town, had a fortune of twenty thousandpounds, were in the habit of spending more than they ought, and ofassociating with people of rank, and were therefore in every respectentitled to think well of themselves, and meanly of others. They were ofa respectable family in the north of England; a circumstance more deeplyimpressed on their memories than that their brother's fortune and theirown had been acquired by trade.Mr. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundredthousand pounds from his father, who had intended to purchase anestate, but did not live to do it. Mr. Bingley intended it likewise, andsometimes made choice of his county; but as he was now provided with agood house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of thosewho best knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend theremainder of his days at Netherfield, and leave the next generation topurchase.His sisters were anxious for his having an estate of his own; but,though he was now only established as a tenant, Miss Bingley was by nomeans unwilling to preside at his table--nor was Mrs. Hurst, who hadmarried a man of more fashion than fortune, less disposed to considerhis house as her home when it suited her. Mr. Bingley had not been ofage two years, when he was tempted by an accidental recommendationto look at Netherfield House. He did look at it, and into it forhalf-an-hour--was pleased with the situation and the principalrooms, satisfied with what the owner said in its praise, and took itimmediately.Between him and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite ofgreat opposition of character. Bingley was endeared to Darcy by theeasiness, openness, and ductility of his temper, though no dispositioncould offer a greater contrast to his own, and though with his own henever appeared dissatisfied. On the strength of Darcy's regard, Bingleyhad the firmest reliance, and of his judgement the highest opinion.In understanding, Darcy was the superior. Bingley was by no meansdeficient, but Darcy was clever. He was at the same time haughty,reserved, and fastidious, and his manners, though well-bred, were notinviting. In that respect his friend had greatly the advantage. Bingleywas sure of being liked wherever he appeared, Darcy was continuallygiving offense.The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was sufficientlycharacteristic. Bingley had never met with more pleasant people orprettier girls in his life; everybody had been most kind and attentiveto him; there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had soon feltacquainted with all the room; and, as to Miss Bennet, he could notconceive an angel more beautiful. Darcy, on the contrary, had seen acollection of people in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, fornone of whom he had felt the smallest interest, and from none receivedeither attention or pleasure. Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be pretty,but she smiled too much.Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so--but still they admiredher and liked her, and pronounced her to be a sweet girl, and onewhom they would not object to know more of. Miss Bennet was thereforeestablished as a sweet girl, and their brother felt authorized by suchcommendation to think of her as he chose.Chapter 5Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennetswere particularly intimate. Sir William Lucas had been formerly in tradein Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to thehonour of knighthood by an address to the king during his mayoralty.The distinction had perhaps been felt too strongly. It had given him adisgust to his business, and to his residence in a small market town;and, in quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a houseabout a mile from Meryton, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge,where he could think with pleasure of his own importance, and,unshackled by business, occupy himself solely in being civil to allthe world. For, though elated by his rank, it did not render himsupercilious; on the contrary, he was all attention to everybody. Bynature inoffensive, friendly, and obliging, his presentation at St.James's had made him courteous.Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be avaluable neighbour to Mrs. Bennet. They had several children. The eldestof them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven, wasElizabeth's intimate friend.That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk overa ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assemblybrought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate."_You_ began the evening well, Charlotte," said Mrs. Bennet with civilself-command to Miss Lucas. "_You_ were Mr. Bingley's first choice.""Yes; but he seemed to like his second better.""Oh! you mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice. To besure that _did_ seem as if he admired her--indeed I rather believe he_did_--I heard something about it--but I hardly know what--somethingabout Mr. Robinson.""Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Mr. Robinson; did notI mention it to you? Mr. Robinson's asking him how he liked our Merytonassemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great manypretty women in the room, and _which_ he thought the prettiest? and hisanswering immediately to the last question: 'Oh! the eldest Miss Bennet,beyond a doubt; there cannot be two opinions on that point.'""Upon my word! Well, that is very decided indeed--that does seem asif--but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know.""_My_ overhearings were more to the purpose than _yours_, Eliza," saidCharlotte. "Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend,is he?--poor Eliza!--to be only just _tolerable_.""I beg you would not put it into Lizzy's head to be vexed by hisill-treatment, for he is such a disagreeable man, that it would be quitea misfortune to be liked by him. Mrs. Long told me last night that hesat close to her for half-an-hour without once opening his lips.""Are you quite sure, ma'am?--is not there a little mistake?" said Jane."I certainly saw Mr. Darcy speaking to her.""Aye--because she asked him at last how he liked Netherfield, and hecould not help answering her; but she said he seemed quite angry atbeing spoke to.""Miss Bingley told me," said Jane, "that he never speaks much,unless among his intimate acquaintances. With _them_ he is remarkablyagreeable.""I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he had been so veryagreeable, he would have talked to Mrs. Long. But I can guess how itwas; everybody says that he is eat up with pride, and I dare say he hadheard somehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage, and had come tothe ball in a hack chaise.""I do not mind his not talking to Mrs. Long," said Miss Lucas, "but Iwish he had danced with Eliza.""Another time, Lizzy," said her mother, "I would not dance with _him_,if I were you.""I believe, ma'am, I may safely promise you _never_ to dance with him.""His pride," said Miss Lucas, "does not offend _me_ so much as prideoften does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot wonder that sovery fine a young man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour,should think highly of himself. If I may so express it, he has a _right_to be proud.""That is very true," replied Elizabeth, "and I could easily forgive_his_ pride, if he had not mortified _mine_.""Pride," observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of herreflections, "is a very common failing, I believe. By all that I haveever read, I am convinced that it is very common indeed; that humannature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of uswho do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of somequality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are differentthings, though the words are often used synonymously. A person maybe proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion ofourselves, vanity to what we would have others think of us.""If I were as rich as Mr. Darcy," cried a young Lucas, who came withhis sisters, "I should not care how proud I was. I would keep a pack offoxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine a day.""Then you would drink a great deal more than you ought," said Mrs.Bennet; "and if I were to see you at it, I should take away your bottledirectly."The boy protested that she should not; she continued to declare that shewould, and the argument ended only with the visit.Chapter 6The ladies of Longbourn soon waited on those of Netherfield. The visitwas soon returned in due form. Miss Bennet's pleasing manners grew onthe goodwill of Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and though the mother wasfound to be intolerable, and the younger sisters not worth speaking to,a wish of being better acquainted with _them_ was expressed towardsthe two eldest. By Jane, this attention was received with the greatestpleasure, but Elizabeth still saw superciliousness in their treatmentof everybody, hardly excepting even her sister, and could not like them;though their kindness to Jane, such as it was, had a value as arising inall probability from the influence of their brother's admiration. Itwas generally evident whenever they met, that he _did_ admire her andto _her_ it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preferencewhich she had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in away to be very much in love; but she considered with pleasure that itwas not likely to be discovered by the world in general, since Janeunited, with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and auniform cheerfulness of manner which would guard her from the suspicionsof the impertinent. She mentioned this to her friend Miss Lucas."It may perhaps be pleasant," replied Charlotte, "to be able to imposeon the public in such a case; but it is sometimes a disadvantage to beso very guarded. If a woman conceals her affection with the same skillfrom the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fixing him; andit will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally inthe dark. There is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost everyattachment, that it is not safe to leave any to itself. We can all_begin_ freely--a slight preference is natural enough; but there arevery few of us who have heart enough to be really in love withoutencouragement. In nine cases out of ten a women had better show _more_affection than she feels. Bingley likes your sister undoubtedly; but hemay never do more than like her, if she does not help him on.""But she does help him on, as much as her nature will allow. If I canperceive her regard for him, he must be a simpleton, indeed, not todiscover it too.""Remember, Eliza, that he does not know Jane's disposition as you do.""But if a woman is partial to a man, and does not endeavour to concealit, he must find it out.""Perhaps he must, if he sees enough of her. But, though Bingley and Janemeet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and, as theyalways see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible thatevery moment should be employed in conversing together. Jane shouldtherefore make the most of every half-hour in which she can command hisattention. When she is secure of him, there will be more leisure forfalling in love as much as she chooses.""Your plan is a good one," replied Elizabeth, "where nothing is inquestion but the desire of being well married, and if I were determinedto get a rich husband, or any husband, I dare say I should adopt it. Butthese are not Jane's feelings; she is not acting by design. As yet,she cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard nor of itsreasonableness. She has known him only a fortnight. She danced fourdances with him at Meryton; she saw him one morning at his own house,and has since dined with him in company four times. This is not quiteenough to make her understand his character.""Not as you represent it. Had she merely _dined_ with him, she mightonly have discovered whether he had a good appetite; but you mustremember that four evenings have also been spent together--and fourevenings may do a great deal.""Yes; these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that theyboth like Vingt-un better than Commerce; but with respect to any otherleading characteristic, I do not imagine that much has been unfolded.""Well," said Charlotte, "I wish Jane success with all my heart; andif she were married to him to-morrow, I should think she had as good achance of happiness as if she were to be studying his character for atwelvemonth. Happiness in marriage is entirely a matter of chance. Ifthe dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other orever so similar beforehand, it does not advance their felicity in theleast. They always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards tohave their share of vexation; and it is better to know as little aspossible of the defects of the person with whom you are to pass yourlife.""You make me laugh, Charlotte; but it is not sound. You know it is notsound, and that you would never act in this way yourself."Occupied in observing Mr. Bingley's attentions to her sister, Elizabethwas far from suspecting that she was herself becoming an object of someinterest in the eyes of his friend. Mr. Darcy had at first scarcelyallowed her to be pretty; he had looked at her without admiration at theball; and when they next met, he looked at her only to criticise. But nosooner had he made it clear to himself and his friends that she hardlyhad a good feature in her face, than he began to find it was rendereduncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of her dark eyes. Tothis discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying. Though he haddetected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetryin her form, he was forced to acknowledge her figure to be light andpleasing; and in spite of his asserting that her manners were not thoseof the fashionable world, he was caught by their easy playfulness. Ofthis she was perfectly unaware; to her he was only the man who madehimself agreeable nowhere, and who had not thought her handsome enoughto dance with.He began to wish to know more of her, and as a step towards conversingwith her himself, attended to her conversation with others. His doing sodrew her notice. It was at Sir William Lucas's, where a large party wereassembled."What does Mr. Darcy mean," said she to Charlotte, "by listening to myconversation with Colonel Forster?""That is a question which Mr. Darcy only can answer.""But if he does it any more I shall certainly let him know that I seewhat he is about. He has a very satirical eye, and if I do not begin bybeing impertinent myself, I shall soon grow afraid of him."On his approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to haveany intention of speaking, Miss Lucas defied her friend to mention sucha subject to him; which immediately provoking Elizabeth to do it, sheturned to him and said:"Did you not think, Mr. Darcy, that I expressed myself uncommonlywell just now, when I was teasing Colonel Forster to give us a ball atMeryton?""With great energy; but it is always a subject which makes a ladyenergetic.""You are severe on us.""It will be _her_ turn soon to be teased," said Miss Lucas. "I am goingto open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows.""You are a very strange creature by way of a friend!--always wanting meto play and sing before anybody and everybody! If my vanity had takena musical turn, you would have been invaluable; but as it is, I wouldreally rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit ofhearing the very best performers." On Miss Lucas's persevering, however,she added, "Very well, if it must be so, it must." And gravely glancingat Mr. Darcy, "There is a fine old saying, which everybody here is ofcourse familiar with: 'Keep your breath to cool your porridge'; and Ishall keep mine to swell my song."Her performance was pleasing, though by no means capital. After a songor two, and before she could reply to the entreaties of several thatshe would sing again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by hersister Mary, who having, in consequence of being the only plain one inthe family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, was alwaysimpatient for display.Mary had neither genius nor taste; and though vanity had given herapplication, it had given her likewise a pedantic air and conceitedmanner, which would have injured a higher degree of excellence than shehad reached. Elizabeth, easy and unaffected, had been listened to withmuch more pleasure, though not playing half so well; and Mary, at theend of a long concerto, was glad to purchase praise and gratitude byScotch and Irish airs, at the request of her younger sisters, who,with some of the Lucases, and two or three officers, joined eagerly indancing at one end of the room.Mr. Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode ofpassing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and was toomuch engrossed by his thoughts to perceive that Sir William Lucas washis neighbour, till Sir William thus began:"What a charming amusement for young people this is, Mr. Darcy! Thereis nothing like dancing after all. I consider it as one of the firstrefinements of polished society.""Certainly, sir; and it has the advantage also of being in vogue amongstthe less polished societies of the world. Every savage can dance."Sir William only smiled. "Your friend performs delightfully," hecontinued after a pause, on seeing Bingley join the group; "and I doubtnot that you are an adept in the science yourself, Mr. Darcy.""You saw me dance at Meryton, I believe, sir.""Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight. Doyou often dance at St. James's?""Never, sir.""Do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?""It is a compliment which I never pay to any place if I can avoid it.""You have a house in town, I conclude?"Mr. Darcy bowed."I had once had some thought of fixing in town myself--for I am fondof superior society; but I did not feel quite certain that the air ofLondon would agree with Lady Lucas."He paused in hopes of an answer; but his companion was not disposedto make any; and Elizabeth at that instant moving towards them, he wasstruck with the action of doing a very gallant thing, and called out toher:"My dear Miss Eliza, why are you not dancing? Mr. Darcy, you must allowme to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner. Youcannot refuse to dance, I am sure when so much beauty is before you."And, taking her hand, he would have given it to Mr. Darcy who, thoughextremely surprised, was not unwilling to receive it, when she instantlydrew back, and said with some discomposure to Sir William:"Indeed, sir, I have not the least intention of dancing. I entreat younot to suppose that I moved this way in order to beg for a partner."Mr. Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the honour ofher hand, but in vain. Elizabeth was determined; nor did Sir William atall shake her purpose by his attempt at persuasion."You excel so much in the dance, Miss Eliza, that it is cruel to denyme the happiness of seeing you; and though this gentleman dislikes theamusement in general, he can have no objection, I am sure, to oblige usfor one half-hour.""Mr. Darcy is all politeness," said Elizabeth, smiling."He is, indeed; but, considering the inducement, my dear Miss Eliza,we cannot wonder at his complaisance--for who would object to such apartner?"Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. Her resistance had notinjured her with the gentleman, and he was thinking of her with somecomplacency, when thus accosted by Miss Bingley:"I can guess the subject of your reverie.""I should imagine not.""You are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many eveningsin this manner--in such society; and indeed I am quite of your opinion.I was never more annoyed! The insipidity, and yet the noise--thenothingness, and yet the self-importance of all those people! What wouldI give to hear your strictures on them!""Your conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you. My mind was moreagreeably engaged. I have been meditating on the very great pleasurewhich a pair of fine eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow."Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face, and desired hewould tell her what lady had the credit of inspiring such reflections.Mr. Darcy replied with great intrepidity:"Miss Elizabeth Bennet.""Miss Elizabeth Bennet!" repeated Miss Bingley. "I am all astonishment.How long has she been such a favourite?--and pray, when am I to wish youjoy?""That is exactly the question which I expected you to ask. A lady'simagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from loveto matrimony, in a moment. I knew you would be wishing me joy.""Nay, if you are serious about it, I shall consider the matter isabsolutely settled. You will be having a charming mother-in-law, indeed;and, of course, she will always be at Pemberley with you."He listened to her with perfect indifference while she chose toentertain herself in this manner; and as his composure convinced herthat all was safe, her wit flowed long.Chapter 7Mr. Bennet's property consisted almost entirely in an estate of twothousand a year, which, unfortunately for his daughters, was entailed,in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and their mother'sfortune, though ample for her situation in life, could but ill supplythe deficiency of his. Her father had been an attorney in Meryton, andhad left her four thousand pounds.She had a sister married to a Mr. Phillips, who had been a clerk totheir father and succeeded him in the business, and a brother settled inLondon in a respectable line of trade.The village of Longbourn was only one mile from Meryton; a mostconvenient distance for the young ladies, who were usually temptedthither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt andto a milliner's shop just over the way. The two youngest of the family,Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions;their minds were more vacant than their sisters', and when nothingbetter offered, a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse their morninghours and furnish conversation for the evening; and however bare of newsthe country in general might be, they always contrived to learn somefrom their aunt. At present, indeed, they were well supplied both withnews and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in theneighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter, and Meryton was theheadquarters.Their visits to Mrs. Phillips were now productive of the mostinteresting intelligence. Every day added something to their knowledgeof the officers' names and connections. Their lodgings were not long asecret, and at length they began to know the officers themselves. Mr.Phillips visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a store offelicity unknown before. They could talk of nothing but officers; andMr. Bingley's large fortune, the mention of which gave animationto their mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to theregimentals of an ensign.After listening one morning to their effusions on this subject, Mr.Bennet coolly observed:"From all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must be twoof the silliest girls in the country. I have suspected it some time, butI am now convinced."Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with perfectindifference, continued to express her admiration of Captain Carter,and her hope of seeing him in the course of the day, as he was going thenext morning to London."I am astonished, my dear," said Mrs. Bennet, "that you should be soready to think your own children silly. If I wished to think slightinglyof anybody's children, it should not be of my own, however.""If my children are silly, I must hope to be always sensible of it.""Yes--but as it happens, they are all of them very clever.""This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree. Ihad hoped that our sentiments coincided in every particular, but I mustso far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters uncommonlyfoolish.""My dear Mr. Bennet, you must not expect such girls to have the sense oftheir father and mother. When they get to our age, I dare say they willnot think about officers any more than we do. I remember the time whenI liked a red coat myself very well--and, indeed, so I do still at myheart; and if a smart young colonel, with five or six thousand a year,should want one of my girls I shall not say nay to him; and I thoughtColonel Forster looked very becoming the other night at Sir William's inhis regimentals.""Mamma," cried Lydia, "my aunt says that Colonel Forster and CaptainCarter do not go so often to Miss Watson's as they did when they firstcame; she sees them now very often standing in Clarke's library."Mrs. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman witha note for Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and the servant waitedfor an answer. Mrs. Bennet's eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she waseagerly calling out, while her daughter read,"Well, Jane, who is it from? What is it about? What does he say? Well,Jane, make haste and tell us; make haste, my love.""It is from Miss Bingley," said Jane, and then read it aloud."MY DEAR FRIEND,--"If you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day with Louisa and me,we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our lives,for a whole day's tete-a-tete between two women can never end without aquarrel. Come as soon as you can on receipt of this. My brother and thegentlemen are to dine with the officers.--Yours ever,"CAROLINE BINGLEY""With the officers!" cried Lydia. "I wonder my aunt did not tell us of_that_.""Dining out," said Mrs. Bennet, "that is very unlucky.""Can I have the carriage?" said Jane."No, my dear, you had better go on horseback, because it seems likely torain; and then you must stay all night.""That would be a good scheme," said Elizabeth, "if you were sure thatthey would not offer to send her home.""Oh! but the gentlemen will have Mr. Bingley's chaise to go to Meryton,and the Hursts have no horses to theirs.""I had much rather go in the coach.""But, my dear, your father cannot spare the horses, I am sure. They arewanted in the farm, Mr. Bennet, are they not?""They are wanted in the farm much oftener than I can get them.""But if you have got them to-day," said Elizabeth, "my mother's purposewill be answered."She did at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the horseswere engaged. Jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback, and hermother attended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics of abad day. Her hopes were answered; Jane had not been gone long beforeit rained hard. Her sisters were uneasy for her, but her mother wasdelighted. The rain continued the whole evening without intermission;Jane certainly could not come back."This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!" said Mrs. Bennet more thanonce, as if the credit of making it rain were all her own. Till thenext morning, however, she was not aware of all the felicity of hercontrivance. Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Netherfieldbrought the following note for Elizabeth:"MY DEAREST LIZZY,--"I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, is to beimputed to my getting wet through yesterday. My kind friends will nothear of my returning till I am better. They insist also on my seeing Mr.Jones--therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear of his having beento me--and, excepting a sore throat and headache, there is not much thematter with me.--Yours, etc.""Well, my dear," said Mr. Bennet, when Elizabeth had read the notealoud, "if your daughter should have a dangerous fit of illness--if sheshould die, it would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit ofMr. Bingley, and under your orders.""Oh! I am not afraid of her dying. People do not die of little triflingcolds. She will be taken good care of. As long as she stays there, it isall very well. I would go and see her if I could have the carriage."Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, was determined to go to her, thoughthe carriage was not to be had; and as she was no horsewoman, walkingwas her only alternative. She declared her resolution."How can you be so silly," cried her mother, "as to think of such athing, in all this dirt! You will not be fit to be seen when you getthere.""I shall be very fit to see Jane--which is all I want.""Is this a hint to me, Lizzy," said her father, "to send for thehorses?""No, indeed, I do not wish to avoid the walk. The distance is nothingwhen one has a motive; only three miles. I shall be back by dinner.""I admire the activity of your benevolence," observed Mary, "but everyimpulse of feeling should be guided by reason; and, in my opinion,exertion should always be in proportion to what is required.""We will go as far as Meryton with you," said Catherine and Lydia.Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set offtogether."If we make haste," said Lydia, as they walked along, "perhaps we maysee something of Captain Carter before he goes."In Meryton they parted; the two youngest repaired to the lodgings of oneof the officers' wives, and Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossingfield after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springingover puddles with impatient activity, and finding herself at lastwithin view of the house, with weary ankles, dirty stockings, and a faceglowing with the warmth of exercise.She was shown into the breakfast-parlour, where all but Jane wereassembled, and where her appearance created a great deal of surprise.That she should have walked three miles so early in the day, in suchdirty weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Mrs. Hurst andMiss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contemptfor it. She was received, however, very politely by them; and in theirbrother's manners there was something better than politeness; therewas good humour and kindness. Mr. Darcy said very little, and Mr.Hurst nothing at all. The former was divided between admiration of thebrilliancy which exercise had given to her complexion, and doubt asto the occasion's justifying her coming so far alone. The latter wasthinking only of his breakfast.Her inquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered. MissBennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish, and notwell enough to leave her room. Elizabeth was glad to be taken to herimmediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of givingalarm or inconvenience from expressing in her note how much she longedfor such a visit, was delighted at her entrance. She was not equal,however, to much conversation, and when Miss Bingley left themtogether, could attempt little besides expressions of gratitude for theextraordinary kindness she was treated with. Elizabeth silently attendedher.When breakfast was over they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabethbegan to like them herself, when she saw how much affection andsolicitude they showed for Jane. The apothecary came, and havingexamined his patient, said, as might be supposed, that she had caughta violent cold, and that they must endeavour to get the better of it;advised her to return to bed, and promised her some draughts. The advicewas followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her headached acutely. Elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment; nor werethe other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had, infact, nothing to do elsewhere.When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go, and veryunwillingly said so. Miss Bingley offered her the carriage, and she onlywanted a little pressing to accept it, when Jane testified such concernin parting with her, that Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offerof the chaise to an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the present.Elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was dispatched toLongbourn to acquaint the family with her stay and bring back a supplyof clothes.Chapter 8At five o'clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half-past sixElizabeth was summoned to dinner. To the civil inquiries which thenpoured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing themuch superior solicitude of Mr. Bingley's, she could not make a veryfavourable answer. Jane was by no means better. The sisters, on hearingthis, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, howshocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they dislikedbeing ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter: and theirindifference towards Jane when not immediately before them restoredElizabeth to the enjoyment of all her former dislike.Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she couldregard with any complacency. His anxiety for Jane was evident, and hisattentions to herself most pleasing, and they prevented her feelingherself so much an intruder as she believed she was considered by theothers. She had very little notice from any but him. Miss Bingley wasengrossed by Mr. Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr.Hurst, by whom Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only toeat, drink, and play at cards; who, when he found her to prefer a plaindish to a ragout, had nothing to say to her.When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingleybegan abusing her as soon as she was out of the room. Her manners werepronounced to be very bad indeed, a mixture of pride and impertinence;she had no conversation, no style, no beauty. Mrs. Hurst thought thesame, and added:"She has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but being an excellentwalker. I shall never forget her appearance this morning. She reallylooked almost wild.""She did, indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep my countenance. Verynonsensical to come at all! Why must _she_ be scampering about thecountry, because her sister had a cold? Her hair, so untidy, so blowsy!""Yes, and her petticoat; I hope you saw her petticoat, six inches deepin mud, I am absolutely certain; and the gown which had been let down tohide it not doing its office.""Your picture may be very exact, Louisa," said Bingley; "but this wasall lost upon me. I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkablywell when she came into the room this morning. Her dirty petticoat quiteescaped my notice.""_You_ observed it, Mr. Darcy, I am sure," said Miss Bingley; "and I aminclined to think that you would not wish to see _your_ sister make suchan exhibition.""Certainly not.""To walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or whatever it is,above her ankles in dirt, and alone, quite alone! What could she mean byit? It seems to me to show an abominable sort of conceited independence,a most country-town indifference to decorum.""It shows an affection for her sister that is very pleasing," saidBingley."I am afraid, Mr. Darcy," observed Miss Bingley in a half whisper, "thatthis adventure has rather affected your admiration of her fine eyes.""Not at all," he replied; "they were brightened by the exercise." Ashort pause followed this speech, and Mrs. Hurst began again:"I have an excessive regard for Miss Jane Bennet, she is really a verysweet girl, and I wish with all my heart she were well settled. But withsuch a father and mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there isno chance of it.""I think I have heard you say that their uncle is an attorney inMeryton.""Yes; and they have another, who lives somewhere near Cheapside.""That is capital," added her sister, and they both laughed heartily."If they had uncles enough to fill _all_ Cheapside," cried Bingley, "itwould not make them one jot less agreeable.""But it must very materially lessen their chance of marrying men of anyconsideration in the world," replied Darcy.To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his sisters gave it theirhearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense oftheir dear friend's vulgar relations.With a renewal of tenderness, however, they returned to her room onleaving the dining-parlour, and sat with her till summoned to coffee.She was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, tilllate in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her sleep, andwhen it seemed to her rather right than pleasant that she should godownstairs herself. On entering the drawing-room she found the wholeparty at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspectingthem to be playing high she declined it, and making her sister theexcuse, said she would amuse herself for the short time she could staybelow, with a book. Mr. Hurst looked at her with astonishment."Do you prefer reading to cards?" said he; "that is rather singular.""Miss Eliza Bennet," said Miss Bingley, "despises cards. She is a greatreader, and has no pleasure in anything else.""I deserve neither such praise nor such censure," cried Elizabeth; "I am_not_ a great reader, and I have pleasure in many things.""In nursing your sister I am sure you have pleasure," said Bingley; "andI hope it will be soon increased by seeing her quite well."Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards thetable where a few books were lying. He immediately offered to fetch herothers--all that his library afforded."And I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my owncredit; but I am an idle fellow, and though I have not many, I have morethan I ever looked into."Elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself perfectly with thosein the room."I am astonished," said Miss Bingley, "that my father should have leftso small a collection of books. What a delightful library you have atPemberley, Mr. Darcy!""It ought to be good," he replied, "it has been the work of manygenerations.""And then you have added so much to it yourself, you are always buyingbooks.""I cannot comprehend the neglect of a family library in such days asthese.""Neglect! I am sure you neglect nothing that can add to the beauties ofthat noble place. Charles, when you build _your_ house, I wish it may behalf as delightful as Pemberley.""I wish it may.""But I would really advise you to make your purchase in thatneighbourhood, and take Pemberley for a kind of model. There is not afiner county in England than Derbyshire.""With all my heart; I will buy Pemberley itself if Darcy will sell it.""I am talking of possibilities, Charles.""Upon my word, Caroline, I should think it more possible to getPemberley by purchase than by imitation."Elizabeth was so much caught with what passed, as to leave her verylittle attention for her book; and soon laying it wholly aside, she drewnear the card-table, and stationed herself between Mr. Bingley and hiseldest sister, to observe the game."Is Miss Darcy much grown since the spring?" said Miss Bingley; "willshe be as tall as I am?""I think she will. She is now about Miss Elizabeth Bennet's height, orrather taller.""How I long to see her again! I never met with anybody who delighted meso much. Such a countenance, such manners! And so extremely accomplishedfor her age! Her performance on the pianoforte is exquisite.""It is amazing to me," said Bingley, "how young ladies can have patienceto be so very accomplished as they all are.""All young ladies accomplished! My dear Charles, what do you mean?""Yes, all of them, I think. They all paint tables, cover screens, andnet purses. I scarcely know anyone who cannot do all this, and I am sureI never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without beinginformed that she was very accomplished.""Your list of the common extent of accomplishments," said Darcy, "hastoo much truth. The word is applied to many a woman who deserves it nootherwise than by netting a purse or covering a screen. But I am veryfar from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies in general. Icannot boast of knowing more than half-a-dozen, in the whole range of myacquaintance, that are really accomplished.""Nor I, I am sure," said Miss Bingley."Then," observed Elizabeth, "you must comprehend a great deal in youridea of an accomplished woman.""Yes, I do comprehend a great deal in it.""Oh! certainly," cried his faithful assistant, "no one can be reallyesteemed accomplished who does not greatly surpass what is usually metwith. A woman must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, drawing,dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve the word; and besidesall this, she must possess a certain something in her air and manner ofwalking, the tone of her voice, her address and expressions, or the wordwill be but half-deserved.""All this she must possess," added Darcy, "and to all this she mustyet add something more substantial, in the improvement of her mind byextensive reading.""I am no longer surprised at your knowing _only_ six accomplished women.I rather wonder now at your knowing _any_.""Are you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility of allthis?""I never saw such a woman. I never saw such capacity, and taste, andapplication, and elegance, as you describe united."Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of herimplied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women whoanswered this description, when Mr. Hurst called them to order, withbitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward. As allconversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left theroom."Elizabeth Bennet," said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her,"is one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to theother sex by undervaluing their own; and with many men, I dare say, itsucceeds. But, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art.""Undoubtedly," replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed,"there is a meanness in _all_ the arts which ladies sometimes condescendto employ for captivation. Whatever bears affinity to cunning isdespicable."Miss Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as tocontinue the subject.Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, andthat she could not leave her. Bingley urged Mr. Jones being sent forimmediately; while his sisters, convinced that no country advice couldbe of any service, recommended an express to town for one of the mosteminent physicians. This she would not hear of; but she was not sounwilling to comply with their brother's proposal; and it was settledthat Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennetwere not decidedly better. Bingley was quite uncomfortable; his sistersdeclared that they were miserable. They solaced their wretchedness,however, by duets after supper, while he could find no better reliefto his feelings than by giving his housekeeper directions that everyattention might be paid to the sick lady and her sister.Chapter 9Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister's room, and in themorning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to theinquiries which she very early received from Mr. Bingley by a housemaid,and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on hissisters. In spite of this amendment, however, she requested to have anote sent to Longbourn, desiring her mother to visit Jane, and form herown judgement of her situation. The note was immediately dispatched, andits contents as quickly complied with. Mrs. Bennet, accompanied by hertwo youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast.Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. Bennet would have beenvery miserable; but being satisfied on seeing her that her illness wasnot alarming, she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as herrestoration to health would probably remove her from Netherfield. Shewould not listen, therefore, to her daughter's proposal of being carriedhome; neither did the apothecary, who arrived about the same time, thinkit at all advisable. After sitting a little while with Jane, on MissBingley's appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughters allattended her into the breakfast parlour. Bingley met them with hopesthat Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected."Indeed I have, sir," was her answer. "She is a great deal too ill to bemoved. Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving her. We must trespassa little longer on your kindness.""Removed!" cried Bingley. "It must not be thought of. My sister, I amsure, will not hear of her removal.""You may depend upon it, Madam," said Miss Bingley, with cold civility,"that Miss Bennet will receive every possible attention while sheremains with us."Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments."I am sure," she added, "if it was not for such good friends I do notknow what would become of her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffersa vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which isalways the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetesttemper I have ever met with. I often tell my other girls they arenothing to _her_. You have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley, and acharming prospect over the gravel walk. I do not know a place in thecountry that is equal to Netherfield. You will not think of quitting itin a hurry, I hope, though you have but a short lease.""Whatever I do is done in a hurry," replied he; "and therefore if Ishould resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in fiveminutes. At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here.""That is exactly what I should have supposed of you," said Elizabeth."You begin to comprehend me, do you?" cried he, turning towards her."Oh! yes--I understand you perfectly.""I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily seenthrough I am afraid is pitiful.""That is as it happens. It does not follow that a deep, intricatecharacter is more or less estimable than such a one as yours.""Lizzy," cried her mother, "remember where you are, and do not run on inthe wild manner that you are suffered to do at home.""I did not know before," continued Bingley immediately, "that you were astudier of character. It must be an amusing study.""Yes, but intricate characters are the _most_ amusing. They have atleast that advantage.""The country," said Darcy, "can in general supply but a few subjects forsuch a study. In a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined andunvarying society.""But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to beobserved in them for ever.""Yes, indeed," cried Mrs. Bennet, offended by his manner of mentioninga country neighbourhood. "I assure you there is quite as much of _that_going on in the country as in town."Everybody was surprised, and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment,turned silently away. Mrs. Bennet, who fancied she had gained a completevictory over him, continued her triumph."I cannot see that London has any great advantage over the country, formy part, except the shops and public places. The country is a vast dealpleasanter, is it not, Mr. Bingley?""When I am in the country," he replied, "I never wish to leave it;and when I am in town it is pretty much the same. They have each theiradvantages, and I can be equally happy in either.""Aye--that is because you have the right disposition. But thatgentleman," looking at Darcy, "seemed to think the country was nothingat all.""Indeed, Mamma, you are mistaken," said Elizabeth, blushing for hermother. "You quite mistook Mr. Darcy. He only meant that there was notsuch a variety of people to be met with in the country as in the town,which you must acknowledge to be true.""Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meetingwith many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are fewneighbourhoods larger. I know we dine with four-and-twenty families."Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep hiscountenance. His sister was less delicate, and directed her eyes towardsMr. Darcy with a very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the sake ofsaying something that might turn her mother's thoughts, now asked her ifCharlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn since _her_ coming away."Yes, she called yesterday with her father. What an agreeable man SirWilliam is, Mr. Bingley, is not he? So much the man of fashion! Sogenteel and easy! He has always something to say to everybody. _That_is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves veryimportant, and never open their mouths, quite mistake the matter.""Did Charlotte dine with you?""No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted about the mince-pies. Formy part, Mr. Bingley, I always keep servants that can do their own work;_my_ daughters are brought up very differently. But everybody is tojudge for themselves, and the Lucases are a very good sort of girls,I assure you. It is a pity they are not handsome! Not that I thinkCharlotte so _very_ plain--but then she is our particular friend.""She seems a very pleasant young woman.""Oh! dear, yes; but you must own she is very plain. Lady Lucas herselfhas often said so, and envied me Jane's beauty. I do not like to boastof my own child, but to be sure, Jane--one does not often see anybodybetter looking. It is what everybody says. I do not trust my ownpartiality. When she was only fifteen, there was a man at my brotherGardiner's in town so much in love with her that my sister-in-law wassure he would make her an offer before we came away. But, however, hedid not. Perhaps he thought her too young. However, he wrote some verseson her, and very pretty they were.""And so ended his affection," said Elizabeth impatiently. "There hasbeen many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way. I wonder who firstdiscovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!""I have been used to consider poetry as the _food_ of love," said Darcy."Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may. Everything nourishes what isstrong already. But if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, Iam convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away."Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabethtremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again. She longed tospeak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Mrs.Bennet began repeating her thanks to Mr. Bingley for his kindness toJane, with an apology for troubling him also with Lizzy. Mr. Bingley wasunaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to becivil also, and say what the occasion required. She performed her partindeed without much graciousness, but Mrs. Bennet was satisfied, andsoon afterwards ordered her carriage. Upon this signal, the youngest ofher daughters put herself forward. The two girls had been whispering toeach other during the whole visit, and the result of it was, that theyoungest should tax Mr. Bingley with having promised on his first cominginto the country to give a ball at Netherfield.Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexionand good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whoseaffection had brought her into public at an early age. She had highanimal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which theattention of the officers, to whom her uncle's good dinners, and her owneasy manners recommended her, had increased into assurance. She was veryequal, therefore, to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball, andabruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be the mostshameful thing in the world if he did not keep it. His answer to thissudden attack was delightful to their mother's ear:"I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and whenyour sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day ofthe ball. But you would not wish to be dancing when she is ill."Lydia declared herself satisfied. "Oh! yes--it would be much better towait till Jane was well, and by that time most likely Captain Carterwould be at Meryton again. And when you have given _your_ ball," sheadded, "I shall insist on their giving one also. I shall tell ColonelForster it will be quite a shame if he does not."Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returnedinstantly to Jane, leaving her own and her relations' behaviour to theremarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however,could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of _her_, in spite ofall Miss Bingley's witticisms on _fine eyes_.Chapter 10The day passed much as the day before had done. Mrs. Hurst and MissBingley had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid, whocontinued, though slowly, to mend; and in the evening Elizabeth joinedtheir party in the drawing-room. The loo-table, however, did not appear.Mr. Darcy was writing, and Miss Bingley, seated near him, was watchingthe progress of his letter and repeatedly calling off his attention bymessages to his sister. Mr. Hurst and Mr. Bingley were at piquet, andMrs. Hurst was observing their game.Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused inattending to what passed between Darcy and his companion. The perpetualcommendations of the lady, either on his handwriting, or on the evennessof his lines, or on the length of his letter, with the perfect unconcernwith which her praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and wasexactly in union with her opinion of each."How delighted Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter!"He made no answer."You write uncommonly fast.""You are mistaken. I write rather slowly.""How many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of ayear! Letters of business, too! How odious I should think them!""It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of yours.""Pray tell your sister that I long to see her.""I have already told her so once, by your desire.""I am afraid you do not like your pen. Let me mend it for you. I mendpens remarkably well.""Thank you--but I always mend my own.""How can you contrive to write so even?"He was silent."Tell your sister I am delighted to hear of her improvement on the harp;and pray let her know that I am quite in raptures with her beautifullittle design for a table, and I think it infinitely superior to MissGrantley's.""Will you give me leave to defer your raptures till I write again? Atpresent I have not room to do them justice.""Oh! it is of no consequence. I shall see her in January. But do youalways write such charming long letters to her, Mr. Darcy?""They are generally long; but whether always charming it is not for meto determine.""It is a rule with me, that a person who can write a long letter withease, cannot write ill.""That will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline," cried herbrother, "because he does _not_ write with ease. He studies too much forwords of four syllables. Do not you, Darcy?""My style of writing is very different from yours.""Oh!" cried Miss Bingley, "Charles writes in the most careless wayimaginable. He leaves out half his words, and blots the rest.""My ideas flow so rapidly that I have not time to express them--by whichmeans my letters sometimes convey no ideas at all to my correspondents.""Your humility, Mr. Bingley," said Elizabeth, "must disarm reproof.""Nothing is more deceitful," said Darcy, "than the appearance ofhumility. It is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes anindirect boast.""And which of the two do you call _my_ little recent piece of modesty?""The indirect boast; for you are really proud of your defects inwriting, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity ofthought and carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, youthink at least highly interesting. The power of doing anything withquickness is always prized much by the possessor, and often without anyattention to the imperfection of the performance. When you told Mrs.Bennet this morning that if you ever resolved upon quitting Netherfieldyou should be gone in five minutes, you meant it to be a sort ofpanegyric, of compliment to yourself--and yet what is there so verylaudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary businessundone, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else?""Nay," cried Bingley, "this is too much, to remember at night all thefoolish things that were said in the morning. And yet, upon my honour,I believe what I said of myself to be true, and I believe it at thismoment. At least, therefore, I did not assume the character of needlessprecipitance merely to show off before the ladies.""I dare say you believed it; but I am by no means convinced thatyou would be gone with such celerity. Your conduct would be quite asdependent on chance as that of any man I know; and if, as you weremounting your horse, a friend were to say, 'Bingley, you had betterstay till next week,' you would probably do it, you would probably notgo--and at another word, might stay a month.""You have only proved by this," cried Elizabeth, "that Mr. Bingley didnot do justice to his own disposition. You have shown him off now muchmore than he did himself.""I am exceedingly gratified," said Bingley, "by your converting what myfriend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper. But I amafraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no meansintend; for he would certainly think better of me, if under such acircumstance I were to give a flat denial, and ride off as fast as Icould.""Would Mr. Darcy then consider the rashness of your original intentionsas atoned for by your obstinacy in adhering to it?""Upon my word, I cannot exactly explain the matter; Darcy must speak forhimself.""You expect me to account for opinions which you choose to call mine,but which I have never acknowledged. Allowing the case, however, tostand according to your representation, you must remember, Miss Bennet,that the friend who is supposed to desire his return to the house, andthe delay of his plan, has merely desired it, asked it without offeringone argument in favour of its propriety.""To yield readily--easily--to the _persuasion_ of a friend is no meritwith you.""To yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding ofeither.""You appear to me, Mr. Darcy, to allow nothing for the influence offriendship and affection. A regard for the requester would often makeone readily yield to a request, without waiting for arguments to reasonone into it. I am not particularly speaking of such a case as you havesupposed about Mr. Bingley. We may as well wait, perhaps, till thecircumstance occurs before we discuss the discretion of his behaviourthereupon. But in general and ordinary cases between friend and friend,where one of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of novery great moment, should you think ill of that person for complyingwith the desire, without waiting to be argued into it?""Will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this subject, toarrange with rather more precision the degree of importance which is toappertain to this request, as well as the degree of intimacy subsistingbetween the parties?""By all means," cried Bingley; "let us hear all the particulars, notforgetting their comparative height and size; for that will have moreweight in the argument, Miss Bennet, than you may be aware of. I assureyou, that if Darcy were not such a great tall fellow, in comparison withmyself, I should not pay him half so much deference. I declare I do notknow a more awful object than Darcy, on particular occasions, and inparticular places; at his own house especially, and of a Sunday evening,when he has nothing to do."Mr. Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought she could perceive that he wasrather offended, and therefore checked her laugh. Miss Bingley warmlyresented the indignity he had received, in an expostulation with herbrother for talking such nonsense."I see your design, Bingley," said his friend. "You dislike an argument,and want to silence this.""Perhaps I do. Arguments are too much like disputes. If you and MissBennet will defer yours till I am out of the room, I shall be verythankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me.""What you ask," said Elizabeth, "is no sacrifice on my side; and Mr.Darcy had much better finish his letter."Mr. Darcy took her advice, and did finish his letter.When that business was over, he applied to Miss Bingley and Elizabethfor an indulgence of some music. Miss Bingley moved with some alacrityto the pianoforte; and, after a polite request that Elizabeth would leadthe way which the other as politely and more earnestly negatived, sheseated herself.Mrs. Hurst sang with her sister, and while they were thus employed,Elizabeth could not help observing, as she turned over some music-booksthat lay on the instrument, how frequently Mr. Darcy's eyes were fixedon her. She hardly knew how to suppose that she could be an object ofadmiration to so great a man; and yet that he should look at herbecause he disliked her, was still more strange. She could only imagine,however, at last that she drew his notice because there was somethingmore wrong and reprehensible, according to his ideas of right, than inany other person present. The supposition did not pain her. She likedhim too little to care for his approbation.After playing some Italian songs, Miss Bingley varied the charm bya lively Scotch air; and soon afterwards Mr. Darcy, drawing nearElizabeth, said to her:"Do not you feel a great inclination, Miss Bennet, to seize such anopportunity of dancing a reel?"She smiled, but made no answer. He repeated the question, with somesurprise at her silence."Oh!" said she, "I heard you before, but I could not immediatelydetermine what to say in reply. You wanted me, I know, to say 'Yes,'that you might have the pleasure of despising my taste; but I alwaysdelight in overthrowing those kind of schemes, and cheating a person oftheir premeditated contempt. I have, therefore, made up my mind to tellyou, that I do not want to dance a reel at all--and now despise me ifyou dare.""Indeed I do not dare."Elizabeth, having rather expected to affront him, was amazed at hisgallantry; but there was a mixture of sweetness and archness in hermanner which made it difficult for her to affront anybody; and Darcyhad never been so bewitched by any woman as he was by her. He reallybelieved, that were it not for the inferiority of her connections, heshould be in some danger.Miss Bingley saw, or suspected enough to be jealous; and her greatanxiety for the recovery of her dear friend Jane received someassistance from her desire of getting rid of Elizabeth.She often tried to provoke Darcy into disliking her guest, by talking oftheir supposed marriage, and planning his happiness in such an alliance."I hope," said she, as they were walking together in the shrubberythe next day, "you will give your mother-in-law a few hints, when thisdesirable event takes place, as to the advantage of holding her tongue;and if you can compass it, do cure the younger girls of running afterofficers. And, if I may mention so delicate a subject, endeavour tocheck that little something, bordering on conceit and impertinence,which your lady possesses.""Have you anything else to propose for my domestic felicity?""Oh! yes. Do let the portraits of your uncle and aunt Phillips be placedin the gallery at Pemberley. Put them next to your great-uncle thejudge. They are in the same profession, you know, only in differentlines. As for your Elizabeth's picture, you must not have it taken, forwhat painter could do justice to those beautiful eyes?""It would not be easy, indeed, to catch their expression, but theircolour and shape, and the eyelashes, so remarkably fine, might becopied."At that moment they were met from another walk by Mrs. Hurst andElizabeth herself."I did not know that you intended to walk," said Miss Bingley, in someconfusion, lest they had been overheard."You used us abominably ill," answered Mrs. Hurst, "running away withouttelling us that you were coming out."Then taking the disengaged arm of Mr. Darcy, she left Elizabeth to walkby herself. The path just admitted three. Mr. Darcy felt their rudeness,and immediately said:"This walk is not wide enough for our party. We had better go into theavenue."But Elizabeth, who had not the least inclination to remain with them,laughingly answered:"No, no; stay where you are. You are charmingly grouped, and appearto uncommon advantage. The picturesque would be spoilt by admitting afourth. Good-bye."She then ran gaily off, rejoicing as she rambled about, in the hope ofbeing at home again in a day or two. Jane was already so much recoveredas to intend leaving her room for a couple of hours that evening.Chapter 11When the ladies removed after dinner, Elizabeth ran up to hersister, and seeing her well guarded from cold, attended her into thedrawing-room, where she was welcomed by her two friends with manyprofessions of pleasure; and Elizabeth had never seen them so agreeableas they were during the hour which passed before the gentlemen appeared.Their powers of conversation were considerable. They could describe anentertainment with accuracy, relate an anecdote with humour, and laughat their acquaintance with spirit.But when the gentlemen entered, Jane was no longer the first object;Miss Bingley's eyes were instantly turned toward Darcy, and she hadsomething to say to him before he had advanced many steps. He addressedhimself to Miss Bennet, with a polite congratulation; Mr. Hurst alsomade her a slight bow, and said he was "very glad;" but diffusenessand warmth remained for Bingley's salutation. He was full of joy andattention. The first half-hour was spent in piling up the fire, lest sheshould suffer from the change of room; and she removed at his desireto the other side of the fireplace, that she might be further fromthe door. He then sat down by her, and talked scarcely to anyoneelse. Elizabeth, at work in the opposite corner, saw it all with greatdelight.When tea was over, Mr. Hurst reminded his sister-in-law of thecard-table--but in vain. She had obtained private intelligence that Mr.Darcy did not wish for cards; and Mr. Hurst soon found even his openpetition rejected. She assured him that no one intended to play, andthe silence of the whole party on the subject seemed to justify her. Mr.Hurst had therefore nothing to do, but to stretch himself on one of thesofas and go to sleep. Darcy took up a book; Miss Bingley did the same;and Mrs. Hurst, principally occupied in playing with her braceletsand rings, joined now and then in her brother's conversation with MissBennet.Miss Bingley's attention was quite as much engaged in watching Mr.Darcy's progress through _his_ book, as in reading her own; and shewas perpetually either making some inquiry, or looking at his page. Shecould not win him, however, to any conversation; he merely answered herquestion, and read on. At length, quite exhausted by the attempt to beamused with her own book, which she had only chosen because it was thesecond volume of his, she gave a great yawn and said, "How pleasantit is to spend an evening in this way! I declare after all there is noenjoyment like reading! How much sooner one tires of anything than of abook! When I have a house of my own, I shall be miserable if I have notan excellent library."No one made any reply. She then yawned again, threw aside her book, andcast her eyes round the room in quest for some amusement; when hearingher brother mentioning a ball to Miss Bennet, she turned suddenlytowards him and said:"By the bye, Charles, are you really serious in meditating a dance atNetherfield? I would advise you, before you determine on it, to consultthe wishes of the present party; I am much mistaken if there arenot some among us to whom a ball would be rather a punishment than apleasure.""If you mean Darcy," cried her brother, "he may go to bed, if hechooses, before it begins--but as for the ball, it is quite a settledthing; and as soon as Nicholls has made white soup enough, I shall sendround my cards.""I should like balls infinitely better," she replied, "if they werecarried on in a different manner; but there is something insufferablytedious in the usual process of such a meeting. It would surely be muchmore rational if conversation instead of dancing were made the order ofthe day.""Much more rational, my dear Caroline, I dare say, but it would not benear so much like a ball."Miss Bingley made no answer, and soon afterwards she got up and walkedabout the room. Her figure was elegant, and she walked well; butDarcy, at whom it was all aimed, was still inflexibly studious. Inthe desperation of her feelings, she resolved on one effort more, and,turning to Elizabeth, said:"Miss Eliza Bennet, let me persuade you to follow my example, and take aturn about the room. I assure you it is very refreshing after sitting solong in one attitude."Elizabeth was surprised, but agreed to it immediately. Miss Bingleysucceeded no less in the real object of her civility; Mr. Darcy lookedup. He was as much awake to the novelty of attention in that quarter asElizabeth herself could be, and unconsciously closed his book. He wasdirectly invited to join their party, but he declined it, observing thathe could imagine but two motives for their choosing to walk up and downthe room together, with either of which motives his joining them wouldinterfere. "What could he mean? She was dying to know what could be hismeaning?"--and asked Elizabeth whether she could at all understand him?"Not at all," was her answer; "but depend upon it, he means to be severeon us, and our surest way of disappointing him will be to ask nothingabout it."Miss Bingley, however, was incapable of disappointing Mr. Darcy inanything, and persevered therefore in requiring an explanation of histwo motives."I have not the smallest objection to explaining them," said he, as soonas she allowed him to speak. "You either choose this method of passingthe evening because you are in each other's confidence, and have secretaffairs to discuss, or because you are conscious that your figuresappear to the greatest advantage in walking; if the first, I would becompletely in your way, and if the second, I can admire you much betteras I sit by the fire.""Oh! shocking!" cried Miss Bingley. "I never heard anything soabominable. How shall we punish him for such a speech?""Nothing so easy, if you have but the inclination," said Elizabeth. "Wecan all plague and punish one another. Tease him--laugh at him. Intimateas you are, you must know how it is to be done.""But upon my honour, I do _not_. I do assure you that my intimacy hasnot yet taught me _that_. Tease calmness of manner and presence ofmind! No, no; I feel he may defy us there. And as to laughter, we willnot expose ourselves, if you please, by attempting to laugh without asubject. Mr. Darcy may hug himself.""Mr. Darcy is not to be laughed at!" cried Elizabeth. "That is anuncommon advantage, and uncommon I hope it will continue, for it wouldbe a great loss to _me_ to have many such acquaintances. I dearly love alaugh.""Miss Bingley," said he, "has given me more credit than can be.The wisest and the best of men--nay, the wisest and best of theiractions--may be rendered ridiculous by a person whose first object inlife is a joke.""Certainly," replied Elizabeth--"there are such people, but I hope Iam not one of _them_. I hope I never ridicule what is wise and good.Follies and nonsense, whims and inconsistencies, _do_ divert me, I own,and I laugh at them whenever I can. But these, I suppose, are preciselywhat you are without.""Perhaps that is not possible for anyone. But it has been the studyof my life to avoid those weaknesses which often expose a strongunderstanding to ridicule.""Such as vanity and pride.""Yes, vanity is a weakness indeed. But pride--where there is a realsuperiority of mind, pride will be always under good regulation."Elizabeth turned away to hide a smile."Your examination of Mr. Darcy is over, I presume," said Miss Bingley;"and pray what is the result?""I am perfectly convinced by it that Mr. Darcy has no defect. He owns ithimself without disguise.""No," said Darcy, "I have made no such pretension. I have faults enough,but they are not, I hope, of understanding. My temper I dare not vouchfor. It is, I believe, too little yielding--certainly too little for theconvenience of the world. I cannot forget the follies and vices of othersso soon as I ought, nor their offenses against myself. My feelingsare not puffed about with every attempt to move them. My temperwould perhaps be called resentful. My good opinion once lost, is lostforever.""_That_ is a failing indeed!" cried Elizabeth. "Implacable resentment_is_ a shade in a character. But you have chosen your fault well. Ireally cannot _laugh_ at it. You are safe from me.""There is, I believe, in every disposition a tendency to some particularevil--a natural defect, which not even the best education can overcome.""And _your_ defect is to hate everybody.""And yours," he replied with a smile, "is willfully to misunderstandthem.""Do let us have a little music," cried Miss Bingley, tired of aconversation in which she had no share. "Louisa, you will not mind mywaking Mr. Hurst?"Her sister had not the smallest objection, and the pianoforte wasopened; and Darcy, after a few moments' recollection, was not sorry forit. He began to feel the danger of paying Elizabeth too much attention.Chapter 12In consequence of an agreement between the sisters, Elizabeth wrote thenext morning to their mother, to beg that the carriage might be sent forthem in the course of the day. But Mrs. Bennet, who had calculated onher daughters remaining at Netherfield till the following Tuesday, whichwould exactly finish Jane's week, could not bring herself to receivethem with pleasure before. Her answer, therefore, was not propitious, atleast not to Elizabeth's wishes, for she was impatient to get home. Mrs.Bennet sent them word that they could not possibly have the carriagebefore Tuesday; and in her postscript it was added, that if Mr. Bingleyand his sister pressed them to stay longer, she could spare themvery well. Against staying longer, however, Elizabeth was positivelyresolved--nor did she much expect it would be asked; and fearful, on thecontrary, as being considered as intruding themselves needlessly long,she urged Jane to borrow Mr. Bingley's carriage immediately, and atlength it was settled that their original design of leaving Netherfieldthat morning should be mentioned, and the request made.The communication excited many professions of concern; and enough wassaid of wishing them to stay at least till the following day to workon Jane; and till the morrow their going was deferred. Miss Bingley wasthen sorry that she had proposed the delay, for her jealousy and dislikeof one sister much exceeded her affection for the other.The master of the house heard with real sorrow that they were to go sosoon, and repeatedly tried to persuade Miss Bennet that it would not besafe for her--that she was not enough recovered; but Jane was firm whereshe felt herself to be right.To Mr. Darcy it was welcome intelligence--Elizabeth had been atNetherfield long enough. She attracted him more than he liked--and MissBingley was uncivil to _her_, and more teasing than usual to himself.He wisely resolved to be particularly careful that no sign of admirationshould _now_ escape him, nothing that could elevate her with the hopeof influencing his felicity; sensible that if such an idea had beensuggested, his behaviour during the last day must have material weightin confirming or crushing it. Steady to his purpose, he scarcely spoketen words to her through the whole of Saturday, and though they wereat one time left by themselves for half-an-hour, he adhered mostconscientiously to his book, and would not even look at her.On Sunday, after morning service, the separation, so agreeable to almostall, took place. Miss Bingley's civility to Elizabeth increased at lastvery rapidly, as well as her affection for Jane; and when they parted,after assuring the latter of the pleasure it would always give herto see her either at Longbourn or Netherfield, and embracing her mosttenderly, she even shook hands with the former. Elizabeth took leave ofthe whole party in the liveliest of spirits.They were not welcomed home very cordially by their mother. Mrs. Bennetwondered at their coming, and thought them very wrong to give so muchtrouble, and was sure Jane would have caught cold again. But theirfather, though very laconic in his expressions of pleasure, was reallyglad to see them; he had felt their importance in the family circle. Theevening conversation, when they were all assembled, had lost much ofits animation, and almost all its sense by the absence of Jane andElizabeth.They found Mary, as usual, deep in the study of thorough-bass and humannature; and had some extracts to admire, and some new observations ofthreadbare morality to listen to. Catherine and Lydia had informationfor them of a different sort. Much had been done and much had been saidin the regiment since the preceding Wednesday; several of the officershad dined lately with their uncle, a private had been flogged, and ithad actually been hinted that Colonel Forster was going to be married.Chapter 13"I hope, my dear," said Mr. Bennet to his wife, as they were atbreakfast the next morning, "that you have ordered a good dinner to-day,because I have reason to expect an addition to our family party.""Who do you mean, my dear? I know of nobody that is coming, I am sure,unless Charlotte Lucas should happen to call in--and I hope _my_ dinnersare good enough for her. I do not believe she often sees such at home.""The person of whom I speak is a gentleman, and a stranger."Mrs. Bennet's eyes sparkled. "A gentleman and a stranger! It is Mr.Bingley, I am sure! Well, I am sure I shall be extremely glad to see Mr.Bingley. But--good Lord! how unlucky! There is not a bit of fish to begot to-day. Lydia, my love, ring the bell--I must speak to Hill thismoment.""It is _not_ Mr. Bingley," said her husband; "it is a person whom Inever saw in the whole course of my life."This roused a general astonishment; and he had the pleasure of beingeagerly questioned by his wife and his five daughters at once.After amusing himself some time with their curiosity, he thus explained:"About a month ago I received this letter; and about a fortnight agoI answered it, for I thought it a case of some delicacy, and requiringearly attention. It is from my cousin, Mr. Collins, who, when I am dead,may turn you all out of this house as soon as he pleases.""Oh! my dear," cried his wife, "I cannot bear to hear that mentioned.Pray do not talk of that odious man. I do think it is the hardest thingin the world, that your estate should be entailed away from your ownchildren; and I am sure, if I had been you, I should have tried long agoto do something or other about it."Jane and Elizabeth tried to explain to her the nature of an entail. Theyhad often attempted to do it before, but it was a subject on whichMrs. Bennet was beyond the reach of reason, and she continued to railbitterly against the cruelty of settling an estate away from a family offive daughters, in favour of a man whom nobody cared anything about."It certainly is a most iniquitous affair," said Mr. Bennet, "andnothing can clear Mr. Collins from the guilt of inheriting Longbourn.But if you will listen to his letter, you may perhaps be a littlesoftened by his manner of expressing himself.""No, that I am sure I shall not; and I think it is very impertinent ofhim to write to you at all, and very hypocritical. I hate such falsefriends. Why could he not keep on quarreling with you, as his father didbefore him?""Why, indeed; he does seem to have had some filial scruples on thathead, as you will hear.""Hunsford, near Westerham, Kent, 15th October."Dear Sir,--"The disagreement subsisting between yourself and my late honouredfather always gave me much uneasiness, and since I have had themisfortune to lose him, I have frequently wished to heal the breach; butfor some time I was kept back by my own doubts, fearing lest it mightseem disrespectful to his memory for me to be on good terms with anyonewith whom it had always pleased him to be at variance.--'There, Mrs.Bennet.'--My mind, however, is now made up on the subject, for havingreceived ordination at Easter, I have been so fortunate as to bedistinguished by the patronage of the Right Honourable Lady Catherine deBourgh, widow of Sir Lewis de Bourgh, whose bounty and beneficence haspreferred me to the valuable rectory of this parish, where it shall bemy earnest endeavour to demean myself with grateful respect towards herladyship, and be ever ready to perform those rites and ceremonies whichare instituted by the Church of England. As a clergyman, moreover, Ifeel it my duty to promote and establish the blessing of peace inall families within the reach of my influence; and on these grounds Iflatter myself that my present overtures are highly commendable, andthat the circumstance of my being next in the entail of Longbourn estatewill be kindly overlooked on your side, and not lead you to reject theoffered olive-branch. I cannot be otherwise than concerned at being themeans of injuring your amiable daughters, and beg leave to apologise forit, as well as to assure you of my readiness to make them every possibleamends--but of this hereafter. If you should have no objection toreceive me into your house, I propose myself the satisfaction of waitingon you and your family, Monday, November 18th, by four o'clock, andshall probably trespass on your hospitality till the Saturday se'ennightfollowing, which I can do without any inconvenience, as Lady Catherineis far from objecting to my occasional absence on a Sunday, providedthat some other clergyman is engaged to do the duty of the day.--Iremain, dear sir, with respectful compliments to your lady anddaughters, your well-wisher and friend,"WILLIAM COLLINS""At four o'clock, therefore, we may expect this peace-making gentleman,"said Mr. Bennet, as he folded up the letter. "He seems to be a mostconscientious and polite young man, upon my word, and I doubt not willprove a valuable acquaintance, especially if Lady Catherine should be soindulgent as to let him come to us again.""There is some sense in what he says about the girls, however, and ifhe is disposed to make them any amends, I shall not be the person todiscourage him.""Though it is difficult," said Jane, "to guess in what way he can meanto make us the atonement he thinks our due, the wish is certainly to hiscredit."Elizabeth was chiefly struck by his extraordinary deference for LadyCatherine, and his kind intention of christening, marrying, and buryinghis parishioners whenever it were required."He must be an oddity, I think," said she. "I cannot make himout.--There is something very pompous in his style.--And what can hemean by apologising for being next in the entail?--We cannot suppose hewould help it if he could.--Could he be a sensible man, sir?""No, my dear, I think not. I have great hopes of finding him quite thereverse. There is a mixture of servility and self-importance in hisletter, which promises well. I am impatient to see him.""In point of composition," said Mary, "the letter does not seemdefective. The idea of the olive-branch perhaps is not wholly new, yet Ithink it is well expressed."To Catherine and Lydia, neither the letter nor its writer were in anydegree interesting. It was next to impossible that their cousin shouldcome in a scarlet coat, and it was now some weeks since they hadreceived pleasure from the society of a man in any other colour. As fortheir mother, Mr. Collins's letter had done away much of her ill-will,and she was preparing to see him with a degree of composure whichastonished her husband and daughters.Mr. Collins was punctual to his time, and was received with greatpoliteness by the whole family. Mr. Bennet indeed said little; but theladies were ready enough to talk, and Mr. Collins seemed neither inneed of encouragement, nor inclined to be silent himself. He was atall, heavy-looking young man of five-and-twenty. His air was grave andstately, and his manners were very formal. He had not been long seatedbefore he complimented Mrs. Bennet on having so fine a family ofdaughters; said he had heard much of their beauty, but that in thisinstance fame had fallen short of the truth; and added, that he didnot doubt her seeing them all in due time disposed of in marriage. Thisgallantry was not much to the taste of some of his hearers; but Mrs.Bennet, who quarreled with no compliments, answered most readily."You are very kind, I am sure; and I wish with all my heart it mayprove so, for else they will be destitute enough. Things are settled sooddly.""You allude, perhaps, to the entail of this estate.""Ah! sir, I do indeed. It is a grievous affair to my poor girls, youmust confess. Not that I mean to find fault with _you_, for such thingsI know are all chance in this world. There is no knowing how estateswill go when once they come to be entailed.""I am very sensible, madam, of the hardship to my fair cousins, andcould say much on the subject, but that I am cautious of appearingforward and precipitate. But I can assure the young ladies that I comeprepared to admire them. At present I will not say more; but, perhaps,when we are better acquainted--"He was interrupted by a summons to dinner; and the girls smiled on eachother. They were not the only objects of Mr. Collins's admiration. Thehall, the dining-room, and all its furniture, were examined and praised;and his commendation of everything would have touched Mrs. Bennet'sheart, but for the mortifying supposition of his viewing it all as hisown future property. The dinner too in its turn was highly admired; andhe begged to know to which of his fair cousins the excellency of itscooking was owing. But he was set right there by Mrs. Bennet, whoassured him with some asperity that they were very well able to keep agood cook, and that her daughters had nothing to do in the kitchen. Hebegged pardon for having displeased her. In a softened tone she declaredherself not at all offended; but he continued to apologise for about aquarter of an hour.Chapter 14During dinner, Mr. Bennet scarcely spoke at all; but when the servantswere withdrawn, he thought it time to have some conversation with hisguest, and therefore started a subject in which he expected him toshine, by observing that he seemed very fortunate in his patroness. LadyCatherine de Bourgh's attention to his wishes, and consideration forhis comfort, appeared very remarkable. Mr. Bennet could not have chosenbetter. Mr. Collins was eloquent in her praise. The subject elevated himto more than usual solemnity of manner, and with a most important aspecthe protested that "he had never in his life witnessed such behaviour ina person of rank--such affability and condescension, as he had himselfexperienced from Lady Catherine. She had been graciously pleased toapprove of both of the discourses which he had already had the honour ofpreaching before her. She had also asked him twice to dine at Rosings,and had sent for him only the Saturday before, to make up her pool ofquadrille in the evening. Lady Catherine was reckoned proud by manypeople he knew, but _he_ had never seen anything but affability in her.She had always spoken to him as she would to any other gentleman; shemade not the smallest objection to his joining in the society of theneighbourhood nor to his leaving the parish occasionally for a week ortwo, to visit his relations. She had even condescended to advise him tomarry as soon as he could, provided he chose with discretion; and hadonce paid him a visit in his humble parsonage, where she had perfectlyapproved all the alterations he had been making, and had even vouchsafedto suggest some herself--some shelves in the closet up stairs.""That is all very proper and civil, I am sure," said Mrs. Bennet, "andI dare say she is a very agreeable woman. It is a pity that great ladiesin general are not more like her. Does she live near you, sir?""The garden in which stands my humble abode is separated only by a lanefrom Rosings Park, her ladyship's residence.""I think you said she was a widow, sir? Has she any family?""She has only one daughter, the heiress of Rosings, and of veryextensive property.""Ah!" said Mrs. Bennet, shaking her head, "then she is better off thanmany girls. And what sort of young lady is she? Is she handsome?""She is a most charming young lady indeed. Lady Catherine herself saysthat, in point of true beauty, Miss de Bourgh is far superior to thehandsomest of her sex, because there is that in her features which marksthe young lady of distinguished birth. She is unfortunately of a sicklyconstitution, which has prevented her from making that progress in manyaccomplishments which she could not have otherwise failed of, as I aminformed by the lady who superintended her education, and who stillresides with them. But she is perfectly amiable, and often condescendsto drive by my humble abode in her little phaeton and ponies.""Has she been presented? I do not remember her name among the ladies atcourt.""Her indifferent state of health unhappily prevents her being in town;and by that means, as I told Lady Catherine one day, has deprived theBritish court of its brightest ornament. Her ladyship seemed pleasedwith the idea; and you may imagine that I am happy on every occasion tooffer those little delicate compliments which are always acceptableto ladies. I have more than once observed to Lady Catherine, thather charming daughter seemed born to be a duchess, and that the mostelevated rank, instead of giving her consequence, would be adorned byher. These are the kind of little things which please her ladyship, andit is a sort of attention which I conceive myself peculiarly bound topay.""You judge very properly," said Mr. Bennet, "and it is happy for youthat you possess the talent of flattering with delicacy. May I askwhether these pleasing attentions proceed from the impulse of themoment, or are the result of previous study?""They arise chiefly from what is passing at the time, and though Isometimes amuse myself with suggesting and arranging such little elegantcompliments as may be adapted to ordinary occasions, I always wish togive them as unstudied an air as possible."Mr. Bennet's expectations were fully answered. His cousin was as absurdas he had hoped, and he listened to him with the keenest enjoyment,maintaining at the same time the most resolute composure of countenance,and, except in an occasional glance at Elizabeth, requiring no partnerin his pleasure.By tea-time, however, the dose had been enough, and Mr. Bennet was gladto take his guest into the drawing-room again, and, when tea was over,glad to invite him to read aloud to the ladies. Mr. Collins readilyassented, and a book was produced; but, on beholding it (for everythingannounced it to be from a circulating library), he started back, andbegging pardon, protested that he never read novels. Kitty stared athim, and Lydia exclaimed. Other books were produced, and after somedeliberation he chose Fordyce's Sermons. Lydia gaped as he opened thevolume, and before he had, with very monotonous solemnity, read threepages, she interrupted him with:"Do you know, mamma, that my uncle Phillips talks of turning awayRichard; and if he does, Colonel Forster will hire him. My aunt told meso herself on Saturday. I shall walk to Meryton to-morrow to hear moreabout it, and to ask when Mr. Denny comes back from town."Lydia was bid by her two eldest sisters to hold her tongue; but Mr.Collins, much offended, laid aside his book, and said:"I have often observed how little young ladies are interested by booksof a serious stamp, though written solely for their benefit. It amazesme, I confess; for, certainly, there can be nothing so advantageous tothem as instruction. But I will no longer importune my young cousin."Then turning to Mr. Bennet, he offered himself as his antagonist atbackgammon. Mr. Bennet accepted the challenge, observing that he actedvery wisely in leaving the girls to their own trifling amusements.Mrs. Bennet and her daughters apologised most civilly for Lydia'sinterruption, and promised that it should not occur again, if he wouldresume his book; but Mr. Collins, after assuring them that he bore hisyoung cousin no ill-will, and should never resent her behaviour as anyaffront, seated himself at another table with Mr. Bennet, and preparedfor backgammon.Chapter 15Mr. Collins was not a sensible man, and the deficiency of nature hadbeen but little assisted by education or society; the greatest partof his life having been spent under the guidance of an illiterate andmiserly father; and though he belonged to one of the universities, hehad merely kept the necessary terms, without forming at it any usefulacquaintance. The subjection in which his father had brought him up hadgiven him originally great humility of manner; but it was now agood deal counteracted by the self-conceit of a weak head, living inretirement, and the consequential feelings of early and unexpectedprosperity. A fortunate chance had recommended him to Lady Catherine deBourgh when the living of Hunsford was vacant; and the respect whichhe felt for her high rank, and his veneration for her as his patroness,mingling with a very good opinion of himself, of his authority as aclergyman, and his right as a rector, made him altogether a mixture ofpride and obsequiousness, self-importance and humility.Having now a good house and a very sufficient income, he intended tomarry; and in seeking a reconciliation with the Longbourn family he hada wife in view, as he meant to choose one of the daughters, if he foundthem as handsome and amiable as they were represented by common report.This was his plan of amends--of atonement--for inheriting their father'sestate; and he thought it an excellent one, full of eligibility andsuitableness, and excessively generous and disinterested on his ownpart.His plan did not vary on seeing them. Miss Bennet's lovely faceconfirmed his views, and established all his strictest notions of whatwas due to seniority; and for the first evening _she_ was his settledchoice. The next morning, however, made an alteration; for in aquarter of an hour's tete-a-tete with Mrs. Bennet before breakfast, aconversation beginning with his parsonage-house, and leading naturallyto the avowal of his hopes, that a mistress might be found for it atLongbourn, produced from her, amid very complaisant smiles and generalencouragement, a caution against the very Jane he had fixed on. "As toher _younger_ daughters, she could not take upon her to say--she couldnot positively answer--but she did not _know_ of any prepossession; her_eldest_ daughter, she must just mention--she felt it incumbent on herto hint, was likely to be very soon engaged."Mr. Collins had only to change from Jane to Elizabeth--and it was soondone--done while Mrs. Bennet was stirring the fire. Elizabeth, equallynext to Jane in birth and beauty, succeeded her of course.Mrs. Bennet treasured up the hint, and trusted that she might soon havetwo daughters married; and the man whom she could not bear to speak ofthe day before was now high in her good graces.Lydia's intention of walking to Meryton was not forgotten; every sisterexcept Mary agreed to go with her; and Mr. Collins was to attend them,at the request of Mr. Bennet, who was most anxious to get rid of him,and have his library to himself; for thither Mr. Collins had followedhim after breakfast; and there he would continue, nominally engaged withone of the largest folios in the collection, but really talking to Mr.Bennet, with little cessation, of his house and garden at Hunsford. Suchdoings discomposed Mr. Bennet exceedingly. In his library he had beenalways sure of leisure and tranquillity; and though prepared, as he toldElizabeth, to meet with folly and conceit in every other room of thehouse, he was used to be free from them there; his civility, therefore,was most prompt in inviting Mr. Collins to join his daughters in theirwalk; and Mr. Collins, being in fact much better fitted for a walkerthan a reader, was extremely pleased to close his large book, and go.In pompous nothings on his side, and civil assents on that of hiscousins, their time passed till they entered Meryton. The attention ofthe younger ones was then no longer to be gained by him. Their eyes wereimmediately wandering up in the street in quest of the officers, andnothing less than a very smart bonnet indeed, or a really new muslin ina shop window, could recall them.But the attention of every lady was soon caught by a young man, whomthey had never seen before, of most gentlemanlike appearance, walkingwith another officer on the other side of the way. The officer wasthe very Mr. Denny concerning whose return from London Lydia cameto inquire, and he bowed as they passed. All were struck with thestranger's air, all wondered who he could be; and Kitty and Lydia,determined if possible to find out, led the way across the street, underpretense of wanting something in an opposite shop, and fortunatelyhad just gained the pavement when the two gentlemen, turning back, hadreached the same spot. Mr. Denny addressed them directly, and entreatedpermission to introduce his friend, Mr. Wickham, who had returned withhim the day before from town, and he was happy to say had accepted acommission in their corps. This was exactly as it should be; for theyoung man wanted only regimentals to make him completely charming.His appearance was greatly in his favour; he had all the best part ofbeauty, a fine countenance, a good figure, and very pleasing address.The introduction was followed up on his side by a happy readinessof conversation--a readiness at the same time perfectly correct andunassuming; and the whole party were still standing and talking togethervery agreeably, when the sound of horses drew their notice, and Darcyand Bingley were seen riding down the street. On distinguishing theladies of the group, the two gentlemen came directly towards them, andbegan the usual civilities. Bingley was the principal spokesman, andMiss Bennet the principal object. He was then, he said, on his way toLongbourn on purpose to inquire after her. Mr. Darcy corroboratedit with a bow, and was beginning to determine not to fix his eyeson Elizabeth, when they were suddenly arrested by the sight of thestranger, and Elizabeth happening to see the countenance of both as theylooked at each other, was all astonishment at the effect of the meeting.Both changed colour, one looked white, the other red. Mr. Wickham,after a few moments, touched his hat--a salutation which Mr. Darcy justdeigned to return. What could be the meaning of it? It was impossible toimagine; it was impossible not to long to know.In another minute, Mr. Bingley, but without seeming to have noticed whatpassed, took leave and rode on with his friend.Mr. Denny and Mr. Wickham walked with the young ladies to the door ofMr. Phillip's house, and then made their bows, in spite of Miss Lydia'spressing entreaties that they should come in, and even in spite ofMrs. Phillips's throwing up the parlour window and loudly seconding theinvitation.Mrs. Phillips was always glad to see her nieces; and the two eldest,from their recent absence, were particularly welcome, and she waseagerly expressing her surprise at their sudden return home, which, astheir own carriage had not fetched them, she should have known nothingabout, if she had not happened to see Mr. Jones's shop-boy in thestreet, who had told her that they were not to send any more draughts toNetherfield because the Miss Bennets were come away, when her civilitywas claimed towards Mr. Collins by Jane's introduction of him. Shereceived him with her very best politeness, which he returned withas much more, apologising for his intrusion, without any previousacquaintance with her, which he could not help flattering himself,however, might be justified by his relationship to the young ladies whointroduced him to her notice. Mrs. Phillips was quite awed by such anexcess of good breeding; but her contemplation of one stranger was soonput to an end by exclamations and inquiries about the other; of whom,however, she could only tell her nieces what they already knew, thatMr. Denny had brought him from London, and that he was to have alieutenant's commission in the ----shire. She had been watching him thelast hour, she said, as he walked up and down the street, and had Mr.Wickham appeared, Kitty and Lydia would certainly have continued theoccupation, but unluckily no one passed windows now except a few of theofficers, who, in comparison with the stranger, were become "stupid,disagreeable fellows." Some of them were to dine with the Phillipsesthe next day, and their aunt promised to make her husband call on Mr.Wickham, and give him an invitation also, if the family from Longbournwould come in the evening. This was agreed to, and Mrs. Phillipsprotested that they would have a nice comfortable noisy game of lotterytickets, and a little bit of hot supper afterwards. The prospect of suchdelights was very cheering, and they parted in mutual good spirits. Mr.Collins repeated his apologies in quitting the room, and was assuredwith unwearying civility that they were perfectly needless.As they walked home, Elizabeth related to Jane what she had seen passbetween the two gentlemen; but though Jane would have defended eitheror both, had they appeared to be in the wrong, she could no more explainsuch behaviour than her sister.Mr. Collins on his return highly gratified Mrs. Bennet by admiringMrs. Phillips's manners and politeness. He protested that, except LadyCatherine and her daughter, he had never seen a more elegant woman;for she had not only received him with the utmost civility, but evenpointedly included him in her invitation for the next evening, althoughutterly unknown to her before. Something, he supposed, might beattributed to his connection with them, but yet he had never met with somuch attention in the whole course of his life.Chapter 16As no objection was made to the young people's engagement with theiraunt, and all Mr. Collins's scruples of leaving Mr. and Mrs. Bennet fora single evening during his visit were most steadily resisted, the coachconveyed him and his five cousins at a suitable hour to Meryton; andthe girls had the pleasure of hearing, as they entered the drawing-room,that Mr. Wickham had accepted their uncle's invitation, and was then inthe house.When this information was given, and they had all taken their seats, Mr.Collins was at leisure to look around him and admire, and he was so muchstruck with the size and furniture of the apartment, that he declared hemight almost have supposed himself in the small summer breakfastparlour at Rosings; a comparison that did not at first convey muchgratification; but when Mrs. Phillips understood from him whatRosings was, and who was its proprietor--when she had listened to thedescription of only one of Lady Catherine's drawing-rooms, and foundthat the chimney-piece alone had cost eight hundred pounds, she felt allthe force of the compliment, and would hardly have resented a comparisonwith the housekeeper's room.In describing to her all the grandeur of Lady Catherine and her mansion,with occasional digressions in praise of his own humble abode, andthe improvements it was receiving, he was happily employed until thegentlemen joined them; and he found in Mrs. Phillips a very attentivelistener, whose opinion of his consequence increased with what sheheard, and who was resolving to retail it all among her neighbours assoon as she could. To the girls, who could not listen to their cousin,and who had nothing to do but to wish for an instrument, and examinetheir own indifferent imitations of china on the mantelpiece, theinterval of waiting appeared very long. It was over at last, however.The gentlemen did approach, and when Mr. Wickham walked into the room,Elizabeth felt that she had neither been seeing him before, nor thinkingof him since, with the smallest degree of unreasonable admiration.The officers of the ----shire were in general a very creditable,gentlemanlike set, and the best of them were of the present party; butMr. Wickham was as far beyond them all in person, countenance, air, andwalk, as _they_ were superior to the broad-faced, stuffy uncle Phillips,breathing port wine, who followed them into the room.Mr. Wickham was the happy man towards whom almost every female eye wasturned, and Elizabeth was the happy woman by whom he finally seatedhimself; and the agreeable manner in which he immediately fell intoconversation, though it was only on its being a wet night, made her feelthat the commonest, dullest, most threadbare topic might be renderedinteresting by the skill of the speaker.With such rivals for the notice of the fair as Mr. Wickham and theofficers, Mr. Collins seemed to sink into insignificance; to the youngladies he certainly was nothing; but he had still at intervals a kindlistener in Mrs. Phillips, and was by her watchfulness, most abundantlysupplied with coffee and muffin. When the card-tables were placed, hehad the opportunity of obliging her in turn, by sitting down to whist."I know little of the game at present," said he, "but I shall be gladto improve myself, for in my situation in life--" Mrs. Phillips was veryglad for his compliance, but could not wait for his reason.Mr. Wickham did not play at whist, and with ready delight was hereceived at the other table between Elizabeth and Lydia. At first thereseemed danger of Lydia's engrossing him entirely, for she was a mostdetermined talker; but being likewise extremely fond of lottery tickets,she soon grew too much interested in the game, too eager in making betsand exclaiming after prizes to have attention for anyone in particular.Allowing for the common demands of the game, Mr. Wickham was thereforeat leisure to talk to Elizabeth, and she was very willing to hearhim, though what she chiefly wished to hear she could not hope to betold--the history of his acquaintance with Mr. Darcy. She dared noteven mention that gentleman. Her curiosity, however, was unexpectedlyrelieved. Mr. Wickham began the subject himself. He inquired how farNetherfield was from Meryton; and, after receiving her answer, asked ina hesitating manner how long Mr. Darcy had been staying there."About a month," said Elizabeth; and then, unwilling to let the subjectdrop, added, "He is a man of very large property in Derbyshire, Iunderstand.""Yes," replied Mr. Wickham; "his estate there is a noble one. A clearten thousand per annum. You could not have met with a person morecapable of giving you certain information on that head than myself, forI have been connected with his family in a particular manner from myinfancy."Elizabeth could not but look surprised."You may well be surprised, Miss Bennet, at such an assertion, afterseeing, as you probably might, the very cold manner of our meetingyesterday. Are you much acquainted with Mr. Darcy?""As much as I ever wish to be," cried Elizabeth very warmly. "I havespent four days in the same house with him, and I think him verydisagreeable.""I have no right to give _my_ opinion," said Wickham, "as to his beingagreeable or otherwise. I am not qualified to form one. I have known himtoo long and too well to be a fair judge. It is impossible for _me_to be impartial. But I believe your opinion of him would in generalastonish--and perhaps you would not express it quite so stronglyanywhere else. Here you are in your own family.""Upon my word, I say no more _here_ than I might say in any house inthe neighbourhood, except Netherfield. He is not at all liked inHertfordshire. Everybody is disgusted with his pride. You will not findhim more favourably spoken of by anyone.""I cannot pretend to be sorry," said Wickham, after a shortinterruption, "that he or that any man should not be estimated beyondtheir deserts; but with _him_ I believe it does not often happen. Theworld is blinded by his fortune and consequence, or frightened by hishigh and imposing manners, and sees him only as he chooses to be seen.""I should take him, even on _my_ slight acquaintance, to be anill-tempered man." Wickham only shook his head."I wonder," said he, at the next opportunity of speaking, "whether he islikely to be in this country much longer.""I do not at all know; but I _heard_ nothing of his going away when Iwas at Netherfield. I hope your plans in favour of the ----shire willnot be affected by his being in the neighbourhood.""Oh! no--it is not for _me_ to be driven away by Mr. Darcy. If _he_wishes to avoid seeing _me_, he must go. We are not on friendly terms,and it always gives me pain to meet him, but I have no reason foravoiding _him_ but what I might proclaim before all the world, a senseof very great ill-usage, and most painful regrets at his being what heis. His father, Miss Bennet, the late Mr. Darcy, was one of the best menthat ever breathed, and the truest friend I ever had; and I can neverbe in company with this Mr. Darcy without being grieved to the soul bya thousand tender recollections. His behaviour to myself has beenscandalous; but I verily believe I could forgive him anything andeverything, rather than his disappointing the hopes and disgracing thememory of his father."Elizabeth found the interest of the subject increase, and listened withall her heart; but the delicacy of it prevented further inquiry.Mr. Wickham began to speak on more general topics, Meryton, theneighbourhood, the society, appearing highly pleased with all thathe had yet seen, and speaking of the latter with gentle but veryintelligible gallantry."It was the prospect of constant society, and good society," he added,"which was my chief inducement to enter the ----shire. I knew it to bea most respectable, agreeable corps, and my friend Denny tempted mefurther by his account of their present quarters, and the very greatattentions and excellent acquaintances Meryton had procured them.Society, I own, is necessary to me. I have been a disappointed man, andmy spirits will not bear solitude. I _must_ have employment and society.A military life is not what I was intended for, but circumstances havenow made it eligible. The church _ought_ to have been my profession--Iwas brought up for the church, and I should at this time have been inpossession of a most valuable living, had it pleased the gentleman wewere speaking of just now.""Indeed!""Yes--the late Mr. Darcy bequeathed me the next presentation of the bestliving in his gift. He was my godfather, and excessively attached to me.I cannot do justice to his kindness. He meant to provide for me amply,and thought he had done it; but when the living fell, it was givenelsewhere.""Good heavens!" cried Elizabeth; "but how could _that_ be? How could hiswill be disregarded? Why did you not seek legal redress?""There was just such an informality in the terms of the bequest as togive me no hope from law. A man of honour could not have doubted theintention, but Mr. Darcy chose to doubt it--or to treat it as a merelyconditional recommendation, and to assert that I had forfeited all claimto it by extravagance, imprudence--in short anything or nothing. Certainit is, that the living became vacant two years ago, exactly as I wasof an age to hold it, and that it was given to another man; and noless certain is it, that I cannot accuse myself of having really doneanything to deserve to lose it. I have a warm, unguarded temper, andI may have spoken my opinion _of_ him, and _to_ him, too freely. I canrecall nothing worse. But the fact is, that we are very different sortof men, and that he hates me.""This is quite shocking! He deserves to be publicly disgraced.""Some time or other he _will_ be--but it shall not be by _me_. Till Ican forget his father, I can never defy or expose _him_."Elizabeth honoured him for such feelings, and thought him handsomer thanever as he expressed them."But what," said she, after a pause, "can have been his motive? What canhave induced him to behave so cruelly?""A thorough, determined dislike of me--a dislike which I cannot butattribute in some measure to jealousy. Had the late Mr. Darcy liked meless, his son might have borne with me better; but his father's uncommonattachment to me irritated him, I believe, very early in life. He hadnot a temper to bear the sort of competition in which we stood--the sortof preference which was often given me.""I had not thought Mr. Darcy so bad as this--though I have never likedhim. I had not thought so very ill of him. I had supposed him to bedespising his fellow-creatures in general, but did not suspect him ofdescending to such malicious revenge, such injustice, such inhumanity asthis."After a few minutes' reflection, however, she continued, "I _do_remember his boasting one day, at Netherfield, of the implacability ofhis resentments, of his having an unforgiving temper. His dispositionmust be dreadful.""I will not trust myself on the subject," replied Wickham; "I can hardlybe just to him."Elizabeth was again deep in thought, and after a time exclaimed, "Totreat in such a manner the godson, the friend, the favourite of hisfather!" She could have added, "A young man, too, like _you_, whose verycountenance may vouch for your being amiable"--but she contented herselfwith, "and one, too, who had probably been his companion from childhood,connected together, as I think you said, in the closest manner!""We were born in the same parish, within the same park; the greatestpart of our youth was passed together; inmates of the same house,sharing the same amusements, objects of the same parental care. _My_father began life in the profession which your uncle, Mr. Phillips,appears to do so much credit to--but he gave up everything to be ofuse to the late Mr. Darcy and devoted all his time to the care of thePemberley property. He was most highly esteemed by Mr. Darcy, a mostintimate, confidential friend. Mr. Darcy often acknowledged himself tobe under the greatest obligations to my father's active superintendence,and when, immediately before my father's death, Mr. Darcy gave him avoluntary promise of providing for me, I am convinced that he felt it tobe as much a debt of gratitude to _him_, as of his affection to myself.""How strange!" cried Elizabeth. "How abominable! I wonder that the verypride of this Mr. Darcy has not made him just to you! If from no bettermotive, that he should not have been too proud to be dishonest--fordishonesty I must call it.""It _is_ wonderful," replied Wickham, "for almost all his actions maybe traced to pride; and pride had often been his best friend. It hasconnected him nearer with virtue than with any other feeling. But we arenone of us consistent, and in his behaviour to me there were strongerimpulses even than pride.""Can such abominable pride as his have ever done him good?""Yes. It has often led him to be liberal and generous, to give his moneyfreely, to display hospitality, to assist his tenants, and relieve thepoor. Family pride, and _filial_ pride--for he is very proud of whathis father was--have done this. Not to appear to disgrace his family,to degenerate from the popular qualities, or lose the influence of thePemberley House, is a powerful motive. He has also _brotherly_ pride,which, with _some_ brotherly affection, makes him a very kind andcareful guardian of his sister, and you will hear him generally cried upas the most attentive and best of brothers.""What sort of girl is Miss Darcy?"He shook his head. "I wish I could call her amiable. It gives me pain tospeak ill of a Darcy. But she is too much like her brother--very, veryproud. As a child, she was affectionate and pleasing, and extremely fondof me; and I have devoted hours and hours to her amusement. But she isnothing to me now. She is a handsome girl, about fifteen or sixteen,and, I understand, highly accomplished. Since her father's death, herhome has been London, where a lady lives with her, and superintends hereducation."After many pauses and many trials of other subjects, Elizabeth could nothelp reverting once more to the first, and saying:"I am astonished at his intimacy with Mr. Bingley! How can Mr. Bingley,who seems good humour itself, and is, I really believe, truly amiable,be in friendship with such a man? How can they suit each other? Do youknow Mr. Bingley?""Not at all.""He is a sweet-tempered, amiable, charming man. He cannot know what Mr.Darcy is.""Probably not; but Mr. Darcy can please where he chooses. He does notwant abilities. He can be a conversible companion if he thinks it worthhis while. Among those who are at all his equals in consequence, he isa very different man from what he is to the less prosperous. Hispride never deserts him; but with the rich he is liberal-minded, just,sincere, rational, honourable, and perhaps agreeable--allowing somethingfor fortune and figure."The whist party soon afterwards breaking up, the players gathered roundthe other table and Mr. Collins took his station between his cousinElizabeth and Mrs. Phillips. The usual inquiries as to his success weremade by the latter. It had not been very great; he had lost everypoint; but when Mrs. Phillips began to express her concern thereupon,he assured her with much earnest gravity that it was not of the leastimportance, that he considered the money as a mere trifle, and beggedthat she would not make herself uneasy."I know very well, madam," said he, "that when persons sit down to acard-table, they must take their chances of these things, and happily Iam not in such circumstances as to make five shillings any object. Thereare undoubtedly many who could not say the same, but thanks to LadyCatherine de Bourgh, I am removed far beyond the necessity of regardinglittle matters."Mr. Wickham's attention was caught; and after observing Mr. Collins fora few moments, he asked Elizabeth in a low voice whether her relationwas very intimately acquainted with the family of de Bourgh."Lady Catherine de Bourgh," she replied, "has very lately given hima living. I hardly know how Mr. Collins was first introduced to hernotice, but he certainly has not known her long.""You know of course that Lady Catherine de Bourgh and Lady Anne Darcywere sisters; consequently that she is aunt to the present Mr. Darcy.""No, indeed, I did not. I knew nothing at all of Lady Catherine'sconnections. I never heard of her existence till the day beforeyesterday.""Her daughter, Miss de Bourgh, will have a very large fortune, and it isbelieved that she and her cousin will unite the two estates."This information made Elizabeth smile, as she thought of poor MissBingley. Vain indeed must be all her attentions, vain and useless heraffection for his sister and her praise of himself, if he were alreadyself-destined for another."Mr. Collins," said she, "speaks highly both of Lady Catherine and herdaughter; but from some particulars that he has related of her ladyship,I suspect his gratitude misleads him, and that in spite of her being hispatroness, she is an arrogant, conceited woman.""I believe her to be both in a great degree," replied Wickham; "I havenot seen her for many years, but I very well remember that I never likedher, and that her manners were dictatorial and insolent. She has thereputation of being remarkably sensible and clever; but I rather believeshe derives part of her abilities from her rank and fortune, part fromher authoritative manner, and the rest from the pride for hernephew, who chooses that everyone connected with him should have anunderstanding of the first class."Elizabeth allowed that he had given a very rational account of it, andthey continued talking together, with mutual satisfaction till supperput an end to cards, and gave the rest of the ladies their share of Mr.Wickham's attentions. There could be no conversation in the noiseof Mrs. Phillips's supper party, but his manners recommended him toeverybody. Whatever he said, was said well; and whatever he did, donegracefully. Elizabeth went away with her head full of him. She couldthink of nothing but of Mr. Wickham, and of what he had told her, allthe way home; but there was not time for her even to mention his nameas they went, for neither Lydia nor Mr. Collins were once silent. Lydiatalked incessantly of lottery tickets, of the fish she had lost and thefish she had won; and Mr. Collins in describing the civility of Mr. andMrs. Phillips, protesting that he did not in the least regard his lossesat whist, enumerating all the dishes at supper, and repeatedly fearingthat he crowded his cousins, had more to say than he could well managebefore the carriage stopped at Longbourn House.Chapter 17Elizabeth related to Jane the next day what had passed between Mr.Wickham and herself. Jane listened with astonishment and concern; sheknew not how to believe that Mr. Darcy could be so unworthy of Mr.Bingley's regard; and yet, it was not in her nature to question theveracity of a young man of such amiable appearance as Wickham. Thepossibility of his having endured such unkindness, was enough tointerest all her tender feelings; and nothing remained therefore to bedone, but to think well of them both, to defend the conduct of each,and throw into the account of accident or mistake whatever could not beotherwise explained."They have both," said she, "been deceived, I dare say, in some wayor other, of which we can form no idea. Interested people have perhapsmisrepresented each to the other. It is, in short, impossible for us toconjecture the causes or circumstances which may have alienated them,without actual blame on either side.""Very true, indeed; and now, my dear Jane, what have you got to say onbehalf of the interested people who have probably been concerned in thebusiness? Do clear _them_ too, or we shall be obliged to think ill ofsomebody.""Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of myopinion. My dearest Lizzy, do but consider in what a disgraceful lightit places Mr. Darcy, to be treating his father's favourite in sucha manner, one whom his father had promised to provide for. It isimpossible. No man of common humanity, no man who had any value for hischaracter, could be capable of it. Can his most intimate friends be soexcessively deceived in him? Oh! no.""I can much more easily believe Mr. Bingley's being imposed on, thanthat Mr. Wickham should invent such a history of himself as he gave melast night; names, facts, everything mentioned without ceremony. If itbe not so, let Mr. Darcy contradict it. Besides, there was truth in hislooks.""It is difficult indeed--it is distressing. One does not know what tothink.""I beg your pardon; one knows exactly what to think."But Jane could think with certainty on only one point--that Mr. Bingley,if he _had_ been imposed on, would have much to suffer when the affairbecame public.The two young ladies were summoned from the shrubbery, where thisconversation passed, by the arrival of the very persons of whom they hadbeen speaking; Mr. Bingley and his sisters came to give their personalinvitation for the long-expected ball at Netherfield, which was fixedfor the following Tuesday. The two ladies were delighted to see theirdear friend again, called it an age since they had met, and repeatedlyasked what she had been doing with herself since their separation. Tothe rest of the family they paid little attention; avoiding Mrs. Bennetas much as possible, saying not much to Elizabeth, and nothing at all tothe others. They were soon gone again, rising from their seats with anactivity which took their brother by surprise, and hurrying off as ifeager to escape from Mrs. Bennet's civilities.The prospect of the Netherfield ball was extremely agreeable to everyfemale of the family. Mrs. Bennet chose to consider it as given incompliment to her eldest daughter, and was particularly flatteredby receiving the invitation from Mr. Bingley himself, instead of aceremonious card. Jane pictured to herself a happy evening in thesociety of her two friends, and the attentions of their brother; andElizabeth thought with pleasure of dancing a great deal with Mr.Wickham, and of seeing a confirmation of everything in Mr. Darcy's lookand behaviour. The happiness anticipated by Catherine and Lydia dependedless on any single event, or any particular person, for though theyeach, like Elizabeth, meant to dance half the evening with Mr. Wickham,he was by no means the only partner who could satisfy them, and a ballwas, at any rate, a ball. And even Mary could assure her family that shehad no disinclination for it."While I can have my mornings to myself," said she, "it is enough--Ithink it is no sacrifice to join occasionally in evening engagements.Society has claims on us all; and I profess myself one of thosewho consider intervals of recreation and amusement as desirable foreverybody."Elizabeth's spirits were so high on this occasion, that though she didnot often speak unnecessarily to Mr. Collins, she could not help askinghim whether he intended to accept Mr. Bingley's invitation, and ifhe did, whether he would think it proper to join in the evening'samusement; and she was rather surprised to find that he entertained noscruple whatever on that head, and was very far from dreading a rebukeeither from the Archbishop, or Lady Catherine de Bourgh, by venturing todance."I am by no means of the opinion, I assure you," said he, "that a ballof this kind, given by a young man of character, to respectable people,can have any evil tendency; and I am so far from objecting to dancingmyself, that I shall hope to be honoured with the hands of all my faircousins in the course of the evening; and I take this opportunity ofsoliciting yours, Miss Elizabeth, for the two first dances especially,a preference which I trust my cousin Jane will attribute to the rightcause, and not to any disrespect for her."Elizabeth felt herself completely taken in. She had fully proposed beingengaged by Mr. Wickham for those very dances; and to have Mr. Collinsinstead! her liveliness had never been worse timed. There was no helpfor it, however. Mr. Wickham's happiness and her own were perforcedelayed a little longer, and Mr. Collins's proposal accepted with asgood a grace as she could. She was not the better pleased with hisgallantry from the idea it suggested of something more. It now firststruck her, that _she_ was selected from among her sisters as worthyof being mistress of Hunsford Parsonage, and of assisting to form aquadrille table at Rosings, in the absence of more eligible visitors.The idea soon reached to conviction, as she observed his increasingcivilities toward herself, and heard his frequent attempt at acompliment on her wit and vivacity; and though more astonished thangratified herself by this effect of her charms, it was not long beforeher mother gave her to understand that the probability of their marriagewas extremely agreeable to _her_. Elizabeth, however, did not chooseto take the hint, being well aware that a serious dispute must be theconsequence of any reply. Mr. Collins might never make the offer, andtill he did, it was useless to quarrel about him.If there had not been a Netherfield ball to prepare for and talk of, theyounger Miss Bennets would have been in a very pitiable state at thistime, for from the day of the invitation, to the day of the ball, therewas such a succession of rain as prevented their walking to Merytononce. No aunt, no officers, no news could be sought after--the veryshoe-roses for Netherfield were got by proxy. Even Elizabeth might havefound some trial of her patience in weather which totally suspended theimprovement of her acquaintance with Mr. Wickham; and nothing less thana dance on Tuesday, could have made such a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, andMonday endurable to Kitty and Lydia.Chapter 18Till Elizabeth entered the drawing-room at Netherfield, and looked invain for Mr. Wickham among the cluster of red coats there assembled, adoubt of his being present had never occurred to her. The certaintyof meeting him had not been checked by any of those recollections thatmight not unreasonably have alarmed her. She had dressed with more thanusual care, and prepared in the highest spirits for the conquest of allthat remained unsubdued of his heart, trusting that it was not more thanmight be won in the course of the evening. But in an instant arosethe dreadful suspicion of his being purposely omitted for Mr. Darcy'spleasure in the Bingleys' invitation to the officers; and thoughthis was not exactly the case, the absolute fact of his absence waspronounced by his friend Denny, to whom Lydia eagerly applied, and whotold them that Wickham had been obliged to go to town on business theday before, and was not yet returned; adding, with a significant smile,"I do not imagine his business would have called him away just now, ifhe had not wanted to avoid a certain gentleman here."This part of his intelligence, though unheard by Lydia, was caught byElizabeth, and, as it assured her that Darcy was not less answerable forWickham's absence than if her first surmise had been just, everyfeeling of displeasure against the former was so sharpened by immediatedisappointment, that she could hardly reply with tolerable civility tothe polite inquiries which he directly afterwards approached to make.Attendance, forbearance, patience with Darcy, was injury to Wickham. Shewas resolved against any sort of conversation with him, and turned awaywith a degree of ill-humour which she could not wholly surmount even inspeaking to Mr. Bingley, whose blind partiality provoked her.But Elizabeth was not formed for ill-humour; and though every prospectof her own was destroyed for the evening, it could not dwell long on herspirits; and having told all her griefs to Charlotte Lucas, whom she hadnot seen for a week, she was soon able to make a voluntary transitionto the oddities of her cousin, and to point him out to her particularnotice. The first two dances, however, brought a return of distress;they were dances of mortification. Mr. Collins, awkward and solemn,apologising instead of attending, and often moving wrong without beingaware of it, gave her all the shame and misery which a disagreeablepartner for a couple of dances can give. The moment of her release fromhim was ecstasy.She danced next with an officer, and had the refreshment of talking ofWickham, and of hearing that he was universally liked. When those danceswere over, she returned to Charlotte Lucas, and was in conversation withher, when she found herself suddenly addressed by Mr. Darcy who tookher so much by surprise in his application for her hand, that,without knowing what she did, she accepted him. He walked away againimmediately, and she was left to fret over her own want of presence ofmind; Charlotte tried to console her:"I dare say you will find him very agreeable.""Heaven forbid! _That_ would be the greatest misfortune of all! To finda man agreeable whom one is determined to hate! Do not wish me such anevil."When the dancing recommenced, however, and Darcy approached to claim herhand, Charlotte could not help cautioning her in a whisper, not to be asimpleton, and allow her fancy for Wickham to make her appear unpleasantin the eyes of a man ten times his consequence. Elizabeth made noanswer, and took her place in the set, amazed at the dignity to whichshe was arrived in being allowed to stand opposite to Mr. Darcy, andreading in her neighbours' looks, their equal amazement in beholdingit. They stood for some time without speaking a word; and she began toimagine that their silence was to last through the two dances, and atfirst was resolved not to break it; till suddenly fancying that it wouldbe the greater punishment to her partner to oblige him to talk, she madesome slight observation on the dance. He replied, and was againsilent. After a pause of some minutes, she addressed him a second timewith:--"It is _your_ turn to say something now, Mr. Darcy. I talkedabout the dance, and _you_ ought to make some sort of remark on the sizeof the room, or the number of couples."He smiled, and assured her that whatever she wished him to say should besaid."Very well. That reply will do for the present. Perhaps by and by I mayobserve that private balls are much pleasanter than public ones. But_now_ we may be silent.""Do you talk by rule, then, while you are dancing?""Sometimes. One must speak a little, you know. It would look odd to beentirely silent for half an hour together; and yet for the advantage of_some_, conversation ought to be so arranged, as that they may have thetrouble of saying as little as possible.""Are you consulting your own feelings in the present case, or do youimagine that you are gratifying mine?""Both," replied Elizabeth archly; "for I have always seen a greatsimilarity in the turn of our minds. We are each of an unsocial,taciturn disposition, unwilling to speak, unless we expect to saysomething that will amaze the whole room, and be handed down toposterity with all the eclat of a proverb.""This is no very striking resemblance of your own character, I am sure,"said he. "How near it may be to _mine_, I cannot pretend to say. _You_think it a faithful portrait undoubtedly.""I must not decide on my own performance."He made no answer, and they were again silent till they had gone downthe dance, when he asked her if she and her sisters did not very oftenwalk to Meryton. She answered in the affirmative, and, unable to resistthe temptation, added, "When you met us there the other day, we had justbeen forming a new acquaintance."The effect was immediate. A deeper shade of _hauteur_ overspread hisfeatures, but he said not a word, and Elizabeth, though blaming herselffor her own weakness, could not go on. At length Darcy spoke, and in aconstrained manner said, "Mr. Wickham is blessed with such happy mannersas may ensure his _making_ friends--whether he may be equally capable of_retaining_ them, is less certain.""He has been so unlucky as to lose _your_ friendship," replied Elizabethwith emphasis, "and in a manner which he is likely to suffer from allhis life."Darcy made no answer, and seemed desirous of changing the subject. Atthat moment, Sir William Lucas appeared close to them, meaning to passthrough the set to the other side of the room; but on perceiving Mr.Darcy, he stopped with a bow of superior courtesy to compliment him onhis dancing and his partner."I have been most highly gratified indeed, my dear sir. Such verysuperior dancing is not often seen. It is evident that you belong to thefirst circles. Allow me to say, however, that your fair partner does notdisgrace you, and that I must hope to have this pleasure often repeated,especially when a certain desirable event, my dear Eliza (glancing ather sister and Bingley) shall take place. What congratulations will thenflow in! I appeal to Mr. Darcy:--but let me not interrupt you, sir. Youwill not thank me for detaining you from the bewitching converse of thatyoung lady, whose bright eyes are also upbraiding me."The latter part of this address was scarcely heard by Darcy; but SirWilliam's allusion to his friend seemed to strike him forcibly, and hiseyes were directed with a very serious expression towards Bingley andJane, who were dancing together. Recovering himself, however, shortly,he turned to his partner, and said, "Sir William's interruption has mademe forget what we were talking of.""I do not think we were speaking at all. Sir William could not haveinterrupted two people in the room who had less to say for themselves.We have tried two or three subjects already without success, and what weare to talk of next I cannot imagine.""What think you of books?" said he, smiling."Books--oh! no. I am sure we never read the same, or not with the samefeelings.""I am sorry you think so; but if that be the case, there can at least beno want of subject. We may compare our different opinions.""No--I cannot talk of books in a ball-room; my head is always full ofsomething else.""The _present_ always occupies you in such scenes--does it?" said he,with a look of doubt."Yes, always," she replied, without knowing what she said, for herthoughts had wandered far from the subject, as soon afterwards appearedby her suddenly exclaiming, "I remember hearing you once say, Mr. Darcy,that you hardly ever forgave, that your resentment once created wasunappeasable. You are very cautious, I suppose, as to its _beingcreated_.""I am," said he, with a firm voice."And never allow yourself to be blinded by prejudice?""I hope not.""It is particularly incumbent on those who never change their opinion,to be secure of judging properly at first.""May I ask to what these questions tend?""Merely to the illustration of _your_ character," said she, endeavouringto shake off her gravity. "I am trying to make it out.""And what is your success?"She shook her head. "I do not get on at all. I hear such differentaccounts of you as puzzle me exceedingly.""I can readily believe," answered he gravely, "that reports may varygreatly with respect to me; and I could wish, Miss Bennet, that you werenot to sketch my character at the present moment, as there is reason tofear that the performance would reflect no credit on either.""But if I do not take your likeness now, I may never have anotheropportunity.""I would by no means suspend any pleasure of yours," he coldly replied.She said no more, and they went down the other dance and parted insilence; and on each side dissatisfied, though not to an equal degree,for in Darcy's breast there was a tolerably powerful feeling towardsher, which soon procured her pardon, and directed all his anger againstanother.They had not long separated, when Miss Bingley came towards her, andwith an expression of civil disdain accosted her:"So, Miss Eliza, I hear you are quite delighted with George Wickham!Your sister has been talking to me about him, and asking me a thousandquestions; and I find that the young man quite forgot to tell you, amonghis other communication, that he was the son of old Wickham, the lateMr. Darcy's steward. Let me recommend you, however, as a friend, not togive implicit confidence to all his assertions; for as to Mr. Darcy'susing him ill, it is perfectly false; for, on the contrary, he hasalways been remarkably kind to him, though George Wickham has treatedMr. Darcy in a most infamous manner. I do not know the particulars, butI know very well that Mr. Darcy is not in the least to blame, that hecannot bear to hear George Wickham mentioned, and that though my brotherthought that he could not well avoid including him in his invitation tothe officers, he was excessively glad to find that he had taken himselfout of the way. His coming into the country at all is a most insolentthing, indeed, and I wonder how he could presume to do it. I pity you,Miss Eliza, for this discovery of your favourite's guilt; but really,considering his descent, one could not expect much better.""His guilt and his descent appear by your account to be the same," saidElizabeth angrily; "for I have heard you accuse him of nothing worsethan of being the son of Mr. Darcy's steward, and of _that_, I canassure you, he informed me himself.""I beg your pardon," replied Miss Bingley, turning away with a sneer."Excuse my interference--it was kindly meant.""Insolent girl!" said Elizabeth to herself. "You are much mistakenif you expect to influence me by such a paltry attack as this. I seenothing in it but your own wilful ignorance and the malice of Mr.Darcy." She then sought her eldest sister, who had undertaken to makeinquiries on the same subject of Bingley. Jane met her with a smile ofsuch sweet complacency, a glow of such happy expression, as sufficientlymarked how well she was satisfied with the occurrences of the evening.Elizabeth instantly read her feelings, and at that moment solicitude forWickham, resentment against his enemies, and everything else, gave waybefore the hope of Jane's being in the fairest way for happiness."I want to know," said she, with a countenance no less smiling than hersister's, "what you have learnt about Mr. Wickham. But perhaps you havebeen too pleasantly engaged to think of any third person; in which caseyou may be sure of my pardon.""No," replied Jane, "I have not forgotten him; but I have nothingsatisfactory to tell you. Mr. Bingley does not know the whole ofhis history, and is quite ignorant of the circumstances which haveprincipally offended Mr. Darcy; but he will vouch for the good conduct,the probity, and honour of his friend, and is perfectly convinced thatMr. Wickham has deserved much less attention from Mr. Darcy than he hasreceived; and I am sorry to say by his account as well as his sister's,Mr. Wickham is by no means a respectable young man. I am afraid he hasbeen very imprudent, and has deserved to lose Mr. Darcy's regard.""Mr. Bingley does not know Mr. Wickham himself?""No; he never saw him till the other morning at Meryton.""This account then is what he has received from Mr. Darcy. I amsatisfied. But what does he say of the living?""He does not exactly recollect the circumstances, though he has heardthem from Mr. Darcy more than once, but he believes that it was left tohim _conditionally_ only.""I have not a doubt of Mr. Bingley's sincerity," said Elizabeth warmly;"but you must excuse my not being convinced by assurances only. Mr.Bingley's defense of his friend was a very able one, I dare say; butsince he is unacquainted with several parts of the story, and has learntthe rest from that friend himself, I shall venture to still think ofboth gentlemen as I did before."She then changed the discourse to one more gratifying to each, and onwhich there could be no difference of sentiment. Elizabeth listened withdelight to the happy, though modest hopes which Jane entertained of Mr.Bingley's regard, and said all in her power to heighten her confidencein it. On their being joined by Mr. Bingley himself, Elizabeth withdrewto Miss Lucas; to whose inquiry after the pleasantness of her lastpartner she had scarcely replied, before Mr. Collins came up to them,and told her with great exultation that he had just been so fortunate asto make a most important discovery."I have found out," said he, "by a singular accident, that there is nowin the room a near relation of my patroness. I happened to overhear thegentleman himself mentioning to the young lady who does the honours ofthe house the names of his cousin Miss de Bourgh, and of her mother LadyCatherine. How wonderfully these sort of things occur! Who would havethought of my meeting with, perhaps, a nephew of Lady Catherine deBourgh in this assembly! I am most thankful that the discovery is madein time for me to pay my respects to him, which I am now going todo, and trust he will excuse my not having done it before. My totalignorance of the connection must plead my apology.""You are not going to introduce yourself to Mr. Darcy!""Indeed I am. I shall entreat his pardon for not having done it earlier.I believe him to be Lady Catherine's _nephew_. It will be in my power toassure him that her ladyship was quite well yesterday se'nnight."Elizabeth tried hard to dissuade him from such a scheme, assuring himthat Mr. Darcy would consider his addressing him without introductionas an impertinent freedom, rather than a compliment to his aunt; thatit was not in the least necessary there should be any notice on eitherside; and that if it were, it must belong to Mr. Darcy, the superior inconsequence, to begin the acquaintance. Mr. Collins listened to herwith the determined air of following his own inclination, and, when sheceased speaking, replied thus:"My dear Miss Elizabeth, I have the highest opinion in the world inyour excellent judgement in all matters within the scope of yourunderstanding; but permit me to say, that there must be a widedifference between the established forms of ceremony amongst the laity,and those which regulate the clergy; for, give me leave to observe thatI consider the clerical office as equal in point of dignity withthe highest rank in the kingdom--provided that a proper humility ofbehaviour is at the same time maintained. You must therefore allow me tofollow the dictates of my conscience on this occasion, which leads me toperform what I look on as a point of duty. Pardon me for neglecting toprofit by your advice, which on every other subject shall be my constantguide, though in the case before us I consider myself more fitted byeducation and habitual study to decide on what is right than a younglady like yourself." And with a low bow he left her to attack Mr.Darcy, whose reception of his advances she eagerly watched, and whoseastonishment at being so addressed was very evident. Her cousin prefacedhis speech with a solemn bow and though she could not hear a word ofit, she felt as if hearing it all, and saw in the motion of his lips thewords "apology," "Hunsford," and "Lady Catherine de Bourgh." It vexedher to see him expose himself to such a man. Mr. Darcy was eyeing himwith unrestrained wonder, and when at last Mr. Collins allowed him timeto speak, replied with an air of distant civility. Mr. Collins, however,was not discouraged from speaking again, and Mr. Darcy's contempt seemedabundantly increasing with the length of his second speech, and at theend of it he only made him a slight bow, and moved another way. Mr.Collins then returned to Elizabeth."I have no reason, I assure you," said he, "to be dissatisfied with myreception. Mr. Darcy seemed much pleased with the attention. He answeredme with the utmost civility, and even paid me the compliment of sayingthat he was so well convinced of Lady Catherine's discernment as to becertain she could never bestow a favour unworthily. It was really a veryhandsome thought. Upon the whole, I am much pleased with him."As Elizabeth had no longer any interest of her own to pursue, she turnedher attention almost entirely on her sister and Mr. Bingley; and thetrain of agreeable reflections which her observations gave birth to,made her perhaps almost as happy as Jane. She saw her in idea settled inthat very house, in all the felicity which a marriage of true affectioncould bestow; and she felt capable, under such circumstances, ofendeavouring even to like Bingley's two sisters. Her mother's thoughtsshe plainly saw were bent the same way, and she determined not toventure near her, lest she might hear too much. When they sat down tosupper, therefore, she considered it a most unlucky perverseness whichplaced them within one of each other; and deeply was she vexed to findthat her mother was talking to that one person (Lady Lucas) freely,openly, and of nothing else but her expectation that Jane would soonbe married to Mr. Bingley. It was an animating subject, and Mrs. Bennetseemed incapable of fatigue while enumerating the advantages of thematch. His being such a charming young man, and so rich, and living butthree miles from them, were the first points of self-gratulation; andthen it was such a comfort to think how fond the two sisters were ofJane, and to be certain that they must desire the connection as much asshe could do. It was, moreover, such a promising thing for her youngerdaughters, as Jane's marrying so greatly must throw them in the way ofother rich men; and lastly, it was so pleasant at her time of life to beable to consign her single daughters to the care of their sister, thatshe might not be obliged to go into company more than she liked. It wasnecessary to make this circumstance a matter of pleasure, because onsuch occasions it is the etiquette; but no one was less likely than Mrs.Bennet to find comfort in staying home at any period of her life. Sheconcluded with many good wishes that Lady Lucas might soon be equallyfortunate, though evidently and triumphantly believing there was nochance of it.In vain did Elizabeth endeavour to check the rapidity of her mother'swords, or persuade her to describe her felicity in a less audiblewhisper; for, to her inexpressible vexation, she could perceive that thechief of it was overheard by Mr. Darcy, who sat opposite to them. Hermother only scolded her for being nonsensical."What is Mr. Darcy to me, pray, that I should be afraid of him? I amsure we owe him no such particular civility as to be obliged to saynothing _he_ may not like to hear.""For heaven's sake, madam, speak lower. What advantage can it be for youto offend Mr. Darcy? You will never recommend yourself to his friend byso doing!"Nothing that she could say, however, had any influence. Her mother wouldtalk of her views in the same intelligible tone. Elizabeth blushed andblushed again with shame and vexation. She could not help frequentlyglancing her eye at Mr. Darcy, though every glance convinced her of whatshe dreaded; for though he was not always looking at her mother, she wasconvinced that his attention was invariably fixed by her. The expressionof his face changed gradually from indignant contempt to a composed andsteady gravity.At length, however, Mrs. Bennet had no more to say; and Lady Lucas, whohad been long yawning at the repetition of delights which she saw nolikelihood of sharing, was left to the comforts of cold ham andchicken. Elizabeth now began to revive. But not long was the interval oftranquillity; for, when supper was over, singing was talked of, andshe had the mortification of seeing Mary, after very little entreaty,preparing to oblige the company. By many significant looks and silententreaties, did she endeavour to prevent such a proof of complaisance,but in vain; Mary would not understand them; such an opportunity ofexhibiting was delightful to her, and she began her song. Elizabeth'seyes were fixed on her with most painful sensations, and she watched herprogress through the several stanzas with an impatience which was veryill rewarded at their close; for Mary, on receiving, amongst the thanksof the table, the hint of a hope that she might be prevailed on tofavour them again, after the pause of half a minute began another.Mary's powers were by no means fitted for such a display; her voice wasweak, and her manner affected. Elizabeth was in agonies. She looked atJane, to see how she bore it; but Jane was very composedly talking toBingley. She looked at his two sisters, and saw them making signsof derision at each other, and at Darcy, who continued, however,imperturbably grave. She looked at her father to entreat hisinterference, lest Mary should be singing all night. He took the hint,and when Mary had finished her second song, said aloud, "That will doextremely well, child. You have delighted us long enough. Let the otheryoung ladies have time to exhibit."Mary, though pretending not to hear, was somewhat disconcerted; andElizabeth, sorry for her, and sorry for her father's speech, was afraidher anxiety had done no good. Others of the party were now applied to."If I," said Mr. Collins, "were so fortunate as to be able to sing, Ishould have great pleasure, I am sure, in obliging the company with anair; for I consider music as a very innocent diversion, and perfectlycompatible with the profession of a clergyman. I do not mean, however,to assert that we can be justified in devoting too much of our timeto music, for there are certainly other things to be attended to. Therector of a parish has much to do. In the first place, he must makesuch an agreement for tithes as may be beneficial to himself and notoffensive to his patron. He must write his own sermons; and the timethat remains will not be too much for his parish duties, and the careand improvement of his dwelling, which he cannot be excused from makingas comfortable as possible. And I do not think it of light importancethat he should have attentive and conciliatory manners towards everybody,especially towards those to whom he owes his preferment. I cannot acquithim of that duty; nor could I think well of the man who should omit anoccasion of testifying his respect towards anybody connected with thefamily." And with a bow to Mr. Darcy, he concluded his speech, which hadbeen spoken so loud as to be heard by half the room. Many stared--manysmiled; but no one looked more amused than Mr. Bennet himself, while hiswife seriously commended Mr. Collins for having spoken so sensibly,and observed in a half-whisper to Lady Lucas, that he was a remarkablyclever, good kind of young man.To Elizabeth it appeared that, had her family made an agreement toexpose themselves as much as they could during the evening, it wouldhave been impossible for them to play their parts with more spirit orfiner success; and happy did she think it for Bingley and her sisterthat some of the exhibition had escaped his notice, and that hisfeelings were not of a sort to be much distressed by the folly which hemust have witnessed. That his two sisters and Mr. Darcy, however, shouldhave such an opportunity of ridiculing her relations, was bad enough,and she could not determine whether the silent contempt of thegentleman, or the insolent smiles of the ladies, were more intolerable.The rest of the evening brought her little amusement. She was teased byMr. Collins, who continued most perseveringly by her side, and thoughhe could not prevail on her to dance with him again, put it out of herpower to dance with others. In vain did she entreat him to stand up withsomebody else, and offer to introduce him to any young lady in the room.He assured her, that as to dancing, he was perfectly indifferent to it;that his chief object was by delicate attentions to recommend himself toher and that he should therefore make a point of remaining close to herthe whole evening. There was no arguing upon such a project. She owedher greatest relief to her friend Miss Lucas, who often joined them, andgood-naturedly engaged Mr. Collins's conversation to herself.She was at least free from the offense of Mr. Darcy's further notice;though often standing within a very short distance of her, quitedisengaged, he never came near enough to speak. She felt it to be theprobable consequence of her allusions to Mr. Wickham, and rejoiced init.The Longbourn party were the last of all the company to depart, and, bya manoeuvre of Mrs. Bennet, had to wait for their carriage a quarter ofan hour after everybody else was gone, which gave them time to see howheartily they were wished away by some of the family. Mrs. Hurst and hersister scarcely opened their mouths, except to complain of fatigue, andwere evidently impatient to have the house to themselves. They repulsedevery attempt of Mrs. Bennet at conversation, and by so doing threw alanguor over the whole party, which was very little relieved by thelong speeches of Mr. Collins, who was complimenting Mr. Bingley and hissisters on the elegance of their entertainment, and the hospitality andpoliteness which had marked their behaviour to their guests. Darcy saidnothing at all. Mr. Bennet, in equal silence, was enjoying the scene.Mr. Bingley and Jane were standing together, a little detached from therest, and talked only to each other. Elizabeth preserved as steady asilence as either Mrs. Hurst or Miss Bingley; and even Lydia was toomuch fatigued to utter more than the occasional exclamation of "Lord,how tired I am!" accompanied by a violent yawn.When at length they arose to take leave, Mrs. Bennet was most pressinglycivil in her hope of seeing the whole family soon at Longbourn, andaddressed herself especially to Mr. Bingley, to assure him how happy hewould make them by eating a family dinner with them at any time, withoutthe ceremony of a formal invitation. Bingley was all grateful pleasure,and he readily engaged for taking the earliest opportunity of waiting onher, after his return from London, whither he was obliged to go the nextday for a short time.Mrs. Bennet was perfectly satisfied, and quitted the house under thedelightful persuasion that, allowing for the necessary preparations ofsettlements, new carriages, and wedding clothes, she should undoubtedlysee her daughter settled at Netherfield in the course of three or fourmonths. Of having another daughter married to Mr. Collins, she thoughtwith equal certainty, and with considerable, though not equal, pleasure.Elizabeth was the least dear to her of all her children; and though theman and the match were quite good enough for _her_, the worth of eachwas eclipsed by Mr. Bingley and Netherfield.Chapter 19The next day opened a new scene at Longbourn. Mr. Collins made hisdeclaration in form. Having resolved to do it without loss of time, ashis leave of absence extended only to the following Saturday, and havingno feelings of diffidence to make it distressing to himself even atthe moment, he set about it in a very orderly manner, with all theobservances, which he supposed a regular part of the business. Onfinding Mrs. Bennet, Elizabeth, and one of the younger girls together,soon after breakfast, he addressed the mother in these words:"May I hope, madam, for your interest with your fair daughter Elizabeth,when I solicit for the honour of a private audience with her in thecourse of this morning?"Before Elizabeth had time for anything but a blush of surprise, Mrs.Bennet answered instantly, "Oh dear!--yes--certainly. I am sure Lizzywill be very happy--I am sure she can have no objection. Come, Kitty, Iwant you up stairs." And, gathering her work together, she was hasteningaway, when Elizabeth called out:"Dear madam, do not go. I beg you will not go. Mr. Collins must excuseme. He can have nothing to say to me that anybody need not hear. I amgoing away myself.""No, no, nonsense, Lizzy. I desire you to stay where you are." And uponElizabeth's seeming really, with vexed and embarrassed looks, about toescape, she added: "Lizzy, I _insist_ upon your staying and hearing Mr.Collins."Elizabeth would not oppose such an injunction--and a moment'sconsideration making her also sensible that it would be wisest to get itover as soon and as quietly as possible, she sat down again and tried toconceal, by incessant employment the feelings which were divided betweendistress and diversion. Mrs. Bennet and Kitty walked off, and as soon asthey were gone, Mr. Collins began."Believe me, my dear Miss Elizabeth, that your modesty, so far fromdoing you any disservice, rather adds to your other perfections. Youwould have been less amiable in my eyes had there _not_ been this littleunwillingness; but allow me to assure you, that I have your respectedmother's permission for this address. You can hardly doubt thepurport of my discourse, however your natural delicacy may lead you todissemble; my attentions have been too marked to be mistaken. Almost assoon as I entered the house, I singled you out as the companion ofmy future life. But before I am run away with by my feelings on thissubject, perhaps it would be advisable for me to state my reasons formarrying--and, moreover, for coming into Hertfordshire with the designof selecting a wife, as I certainly did."The idea of Mr. Collins, with all his solemn composure, being run awaywith by his feelings, made Elizabeth so near laughing, that she couldnot use the short pause he allowed in any attempt to stop him further,and he continued:"My reasons for marrying are, first, that I think it a right thing forevery clergyman in easy circumstances (like myself) to set the exampleof matrimony in his parish; secondly, that I am convinced that it willadd very greatly to my happiness; and thirdly--which perhaps I oughtto have mentioned earlier, that it is the particular advice andrecommendation of the very noble lady whom I have the honour of callingpatroness. Twice has she condescended to give me her opinion (unaskedtoo!) on this subject; and it was but the very Saturday night before Ileft Hunsford--between our pools at quadrille, while Mrs. Jenkinson wasarranging Miss de Bourgh's footstool, that she said, 'Mr. Collins, youmust marry. A clergyman like you must marry. Choose properly, choosea gentlewoman for _my_ sake; and for your _own_, let her be an active,useful sort of person, not brought up high, but able to make a smallincome go a good way. This is my advice. Find such a woman as soon asyou can, bring her to Hunsford, and I will visit her.' Allow me, by theway, to observe, my fair cousin, that I do not reckon the noticeand kindness of Lady Catherine de Bourgh as among the least of theadvantages in my power to offer. You will find her manners beyondanything I can describe; and your wit and vivacity, I think, must beacceptable to her, especially when tempered with the silence andrespect which her rank will inevitably excite. Thus much for my generalintention in favour of matrimony; it remains to be told why my viewswere directed towards Longbourn instead of my own neighbourhood, where Ican assure you there are many amiable young women. But the fact is, thatbeing, as I am, to inherit this estate after the death of your honouredfather (who, however, may live many years longer), I could not satisfymyself without resolving to choose a wife from among his daughters, thatthe loss to them might be as little as possible, when the melancholyevent takes place--which, however, as I have already said, may notbe for several years. This has been my motive, my fair cousin, andI flatter myself it will not sink me in your esteem. And now nothingremains for me but to assure you in the most animated language of theviolence of my affection. To fortune I am perfectly indifferent, andshall make no demand of that nature on your father, since I am wellaware that it could not be complied with; and that one thousand poundsin the four per cents, which will not be yours till after your mother'sdecease, is all that you may ever be entitled to. On that head,therefore, I shall be uniformly silent; and you may assure yourself thatno ungenerous reproach shall ever pass my lips when we are married."It was absolutely necessary to interrupt him now."You are too hasty, sir," she cried. "You forget that I have made noanswer. Let me do it without further loss of time. Accept my thanks forthe compliment you are paying me. I am very sensible of the honour ofyour proposals, but it is impossible for me to do otherwise than todecline them.""I am not now to learn," replied Mr. Collins, with a formal wave of thehand, "that it is usual with young ladies to reject the addresses of theman whom they secretly mean to accept, when he first applies for theirfavour; and that sometimes the refusal is repeated a second, or even athird time. I am therefore by no means discouraged by what you have justsaid, and shall hope to lead you to the altar ere long.""Upon my word, sir," cried Elizabeth, "your hope is a ratherextraordinary one after my declaration. I do assure you that I am notone of those young ladies (if such young ladies there are) who are sodaring as to risk their happiness on the chance of being asked a secondtime. I am perfectly serious in my refusal. You could not make _me_happy, and I am convinced that I am the last woman in the world whocould make you so. Nay, were your friend Lady Catherine to know me, Iam persuaded she would find me in every respect ill qualified for thesituation.""Were it certain that Lady Catherine would think so," said Mr. Collinsvery gravely--"but I cannot imagine that her ladyship would at alldisapprove of you. And you may be certain when I have the honour ofseeing her again, I shall speak in the very highest terms of yourmodesty, economy, and other amiable qualification.""Indeed, Mr. Collins, all praise of me will be unnecessary. Youmust give me leave to judge for myself, and pay me the complimentof believing what I say. I wish you very happy and very rich, and byrefusing your hand, do all in my power to prevent your being otherwise.In making me the offer, you must have satisfied the delicacy of yourfeelings with regard to my family, and may take possession of Longbournestate whenever it falls, without any self-reproach. This matter maybe considered, therefore, as finally settled." And rising as shethus spoke, she would have quitted the room, had Mr. Collins not thusaddressed her:"When I do myself the honour of speaking to you next on the subject, Ishall hope to receive a more favourable answer than you have now givenme; though I am far from accusing you of cruelty at present, because Iknow it to be the established custom of your sex to reject a man onthe first application, and perhaps you have even now said as much toencourage my suit as would be consistent with the true delicacy of thefemale character.""Really, Mr. Collins," cried Elizabeth with some warmth, "you puzzle meexceedingly. If what I have hitherto said can appear to you in the formof encouragement, I know not how to express my refusal in such a way asto convince you of its being one.""You must give me leave to flatter myself, my dear cousin, that yourrefusal of my addresses is merely words of course. My reasons forbelieving it are briefly these: It does not appear to me that my hand isunworthy of your acceptance, or that the establishment I can offer wouldbe any other than highly desirable. My situation in life, my connectionswith the family of de Bourgh, and my relationship to your own, arecircumstances highly in my favour; and you should take it into furtherconsideration, that in spite of your manifold attractions, it is by nomeans certain that another offer of marriage may ever be made you. Yourportion is unhappily so small that it will in all likelihood undothe effects of your loveliness and amiable qualifications. As I musttherefore conclude that you are not serious in your rejection of me,I shall choose to attribute it to your wish of increasing my love bysuspense, according to the usual practice of elegant females.""I do assure you, sir, that I have no pretensions whatever to that kindof elegance which consists in tormenting a respectable man. I wouldrather be paid the compliment of being believed sincere. I thank youagain and again for the honour you have done me in your proposals, butto accept them is absolutely impossible. My feelings in every respectforbid it. Can I speak plainer? Do not consider me now as an elegantfemale, intending to plague you, but as a rational creature, speakingthe truth from her heart.""You are uniformly charming!" cried he, with an air of awkwardgallantry; "and I am persuaded that when sanctioned by the expressauthority of both your excellent parents, my proposals will not fail ofbeing acceptable."To such perseverance in wilful self-deception Elizabeth would makeno reply, and immediately and in silence withdrew; determined, ifhe persisted in considering her repeated refusals as flatteringencouragement, to apply to her father, whose negative might be utteredin such a manner as to be decisive, and whose behaviour at least couldnot be mistaken for the affectation and coquetry of an elegant female.Chapter 20Mr. Collins was not left long to the silent contemplation of hissuccessful love; for Mrs. Bennet, having dawdled about in the vestibuleto watch for the end of the conference, no sooner saw Elizabeth openthe door and with quick step pass her towards the staircase, than sheentered the breakfast-room, and congratulated both him and herself inwarm terms on the happy prospect of their nearer connection. Mr. Collinsreceived and returned these felicitations with equal pleasure, and thenproceeded to relate the particulars of their interview, with the resultof which he trusted he had every reason to be satisfied, since therefusal which his cousin had steadfastly given him would naturally flowfrom her bashful modesty and the genuine delicacy of her character.This information, however, startled Mrs. Bennet; she would have beenglad to be equally satisfied that her daughter had meant to encouragehim by protesting against his proposals, but she dared not believe it,and could not help saying so."But, depend upon it, Mr. Collins," she added, "that Lizzy shall bebrought to reason. I will speak to her about it directly. She is a veryheadstrong, foolish girl, and does not know her own interest but I will_make_ her know it.""Pardon me for interrupting you, madam," cried Mr. Collins; "but ifshe is really headstrong and foolish, I know not whether she wouldaltogether be a very desirable wife to a man in my situation, whonaturally looks for happiness in the marriage state. If therefore sheactually persists in rejecting my suit, perhaps it were better notto force her into accepting me, because if liable to such defects oftemper, she could not contribute much to my felicity.""Sir, you quite misunderstand me," said Mrs. Bennet, alarmed. "Lizzy isonly headstrong in such matters as these. In everything else she is asgood-natured a girl as ever lived. I will go directly to Mr. Bennet, andwe shall very soon settle it with her, I am sure."She would not give him time to reply, but hurrying instantly to herhusband, called out as she entered the library, "Oh! Mr. Bennet, youare wanted immediately; we are all in an uproar. You must come and makeLizzy marry Mr. Collins, for she vows she will not have him, and if youdo not make haste he will change his mind and not have _her_."Mr. Bennet raised his eyes from his book as she entered, and fixed themon her face with a calm unconcern which was not in the least altered byher communication."I have not the pleasure of understanding you," said he, when she hadfinished her speech. "Of what are you talking?""Of Mr. Collins and Lizzy. Lizzy declares she will not have Mr. Collins,and Mr. Collins begins to say that he will not have Lizzy.""And what am I to do on the occasion? It seems an hopeless business.""Speak to Lizzy about it yourself. Tell her that you insist upon hermarrying him.""Let her be called down. She shall hear my opinion."Mrs. Bennet rang the bell, and Miss Elizabeth was summoned to thelibrary."Come here, child," cried her father as she appeared. "I have sent foryou on an affair of importance. I understand that Mr. Collins has madeyou an offer of marriage. Is it true?" Elizabeth replied that it was."Very well--and this offer of marriage you have refused?""I have, sir.""Very well. We now come to the point. Your mother insists upon youraccepting it. Is it not so, Mrs. Bennet?""Yes, or I will never see her again.""An unhappy alternative is before you, Elizabeth. From this day you mustbe a stranger to one of your parents. Your mother will never see youagain if you do _not_ marry Mr. Collins, and I will never see you againif you _do_."Elizabeth could not but smile at such a conclusion of such a beginning,but Mrs. Bennet, who had persuaded herself that her husband regarded theaffair as she wished, was excessively disappointed."What do you mean, Mr. Bennet, in talking this way? You promised me to_insist_ upon her marrying him.""My dear," replied her husband, "I have two small favours to request.First, that you will allow me the free use of my understanding on thepresent occasion; and secondly, of my room. I shall be glad to have thelibrary to myself as soon as may be."Not yet, however, in spite of her disappointment in her husband, didMrs. Bennet give up the point. She talked to Elizabeth again and again;coaxed and threatened her by turns. She endeavoured to secure Janein her interest; but Jane, with all possible mildness, declinedinterfering; and Elizabeth, sometimes with real earnestness, andsometimes with playful gaiety, replied to her attacks. Though her mannervaried, however, her determination never did.Mr. Collins, meanwhile, was meditating in solitude on what had passed.He thought too well of himself to comprehend on what motives his cousincould refuse him; and though his pride was hurt, he suffered in no otherway. His regard for her was quite imaginary; and the possibility of herdeserving her mother's reproach prevented his feeling any regret.While the family were in this confusion, Charlotte Lucas came to spendthe day with them. She was met in the vestibule by Lydia, who, flying toher, cried in a half whisper, "I am glad you are come, for there is suchfun here! What do you think has happened this morning? Mr. Collins hasmade an offer to Lizzy, and she will not have him."Charlotte hardly had time to answer, before they were joined by Kitty,who came to tell the same news; and no sooner had they entered thebreakfast-room, where Mrs. Bennet was alone, than she likewise began onthe subject, calling on Miss Lucas for her compassion, and entreatingher to persuade her friend Lizzy to comply with the wishes of all herfamily. "Pray do, my dear Miss Lucas," she added in a melancholy tone,"for nobody is on my side, nobody takes part with me. I am cruelly used,nobody feels for my poor nerves."Charlotte's reply was spared by the entrance of Jane and Elizabeth."Aye, there she comes," continued Mrs. Bennet, "looking as unconcernedas may be, and caring no more for us than if we were at York, providedshe can have her own way. But I tell you, Miss Lizzy--if you take itinto your head to go on refusing every offer of marriage in this way,you will never get a husband at all--and I am sure I do not know who isto maintain you when your father is dead. I shall not be able to keepyou--and so I warn you. I have done with you from this very day. I toldyou in the library, you know, that I should never speak to you again,and you will find me as good as my word. I have no pleasure in talkingto undutiful children. Not that I have much pleasure, indeed, in talkingto anybody. People who suffer as I do from nervous complaints can haveno great inclination for talking. Nobody can tell what I suffer! But itis always so. Those who do not complain are never pitied."Her daughters listened in silence to this effusion, sensible thatany attempt to reason with her or soothe her would only increase theirritation. She talked on, therefore, without interruption from any ofthem, till they were joined by Mr. Collins, who entered the room withan air more stately than usual, and on perceiving whom, she said tothe girls, "Now, I do insist upon it, that you, all of you, holdyour tongues, and let me and Mr. Collins have a little conversationtogether."Elizabeth passed quietly out of the room, Jane and Kitty followed, butLydia stood her ground, determined to hear all she could; and Charlotte,detained first by the civility of Mr. Collins, whose inquiries afterherself and all her family were very minute, and then by a littlecuriosity, satisfied herself with walking to the window and pretendingnot to hear. In a doleful voice Mrs. Bennet began the projectedconversation: "Oh! Mr. Collins!""My dear madam," replied he, "let us be for ever silent on this point.Far be it from me," he presently continued, in a voice that marked hisdispleasure, "to resent the behaviour of your daughter. Resignationto inevitable evils is the duty of us all; the peculiar duty of ayoung man who has been so fortunate as I have been in early preferment;and I trust I am resigned. Perhaps not the less so from feeling a doubtof my positive happiness had my fair cousin honoured me with her hand;for I have often observed that resignation is never so perfect aswhen the blessing denied begins to lose somewhat of its value in ourestimation. You will not, I hope, consider me as showing any disrespectto your family, my dear madam, by thus withdrawing my pretensions toyour daughter's favour, without having paid yourself and Mr. Bennet thecompliment of requesting you to interpose your authority in mybehalf. My conduct may, I fear, be objectionable in having accepted mydismission from your daughter's lips instead of your own. But we are allliable to error. I have certainly meant well through the whole affair.My object has been to secure an amiable companion for myself, with dueconsideration for the advantage of all your family, and if my _manner_has been at all reprehensible, I here beg leave to apologise."Chapter 21The discussion of Mr. Collins's offer was now nearly at an end, andElizabeth had only to suffer from the uncomfortable feelings necessarilyattending it, and occasionally from some peevish allusions of hermother. As for the gentleman himself, _his_ feelings were chieflyexpressed, not by embarrassment or dejection, or by trying to avoid her,but by stiffness of manner and resentful silence. He scarcely ever spoketo her, and the assiduous attentions which he had been so sensible ofhimself were transferred for the rest of the day to Miss Lucas, whosecivility in listening to him was a seasonable relief to them all, andespecially to her friend.The morrow produced no abatement of Mrs. Bennet's ill-humour or illhealth. Mr. Collins was also in the same state of angry pride. Elizabethhad hoped that his resentment might shorten his visit, but his plan didnot appear in the least affected by it. He was always to have gone onSaturday, and to Saturday he meant to stay.After breakfast, the girls walked to Meryton to inquire if Mr. Wickhamwere returned, and to lament over his absence from the Netherfield ball.He joined them on their entering the town, and attended them to theiraunt's where his regret and vexation, and the concern of everybody, waswell talked over. To Elizabeth, however, he voluntarily acknowledgedthat the necessity of his absence _had_ been self-imposed."I found," said he, "as the time drew near that I had better not meetMr. Darcy; that to be in the same room, the same party with him for somany hours together, might be more than I could bear, and that scenesmight arise unpleasant to more than myself."She highly approved his forbearance, and they had leisure for a fulldiscussion of it, and for all the commendation which they civillybestowed on each other, as Wickham and another officer walked back withthem to Longbourn, and during the walk he particularly attended toher. His accompanying them was a double advantage; she felt all thecompliment it offered to herself, and it was most acceptable as anoccasion of introducing him to her father and mother.Soon after their return, a letter was delivered to Miss Bennet; it camefrom Netherfield. The envelope contained a sheet of elegant, little,hot-pressed paper, well covered with a lady's fair, flowing hand; andElizabeth saw her sister's countenance change as she read it, and sawher dwelling intently on some particular passages. Jane recollectedherself soon, and putting the letter away, tried to join with her usualcheerfulness in the general conversation; but Elizabeth felt an anxietyon the subject which drew off her attention even from Wickham; and nosooner had he and his companion taken leave, than a glance from Janeinvited her to follow her up stairs. When they had gained their own room,Jane, taking out the letter, said:"This is from Caroline Bingley; what it contains has surprised me a gooddeal. The whole party have left Netherfield by this time, and are ontheir way to town--and without any intention of coming back again. Youshall hear what she says."She then read the first sentence aloud, which comprised the informationof their having just resolved to follow their brother to town directly,and of their meaning to dine in Grosvenor Street, where Mr. Hurst had ahouse. The next was in these words: "I do not pretend to regret anythingI shall leave in Hertfordshire, except your society, my dearest friend;but we will hope, at some future period, to enjoy many returns of thatdelightful intercourse we have known, and in the meanwhile maylessen the pain of separation by a very frequent and most unreservedcorrespondence. I depend on you for that." To these highflownexpressions Elizabeth listened with all the insensibility of distrust;and though the suddenness of their removal surprised her, she sawnothing in it really to lament; it was not to be supposed that theirabsence from Netherfield would prevent Mr. Bingley's being there; and asto the loss of their society, she was persuaded that Jane must cease toregard it, in the enjoyment of his."It is unlucky," said she, after a short pause, "that you should not beable to see your friends before they leave the country. But may we nothope that the period of future happiness to which Miss Bingley looksforward may arrive earlier than she is aware, and that the delightfulintercourse you have known as friends will be renewed with yet greatersatisfaction as sisters? Mr. Bingley will not be detained in London bythem.""Caroline decidedly says that none of the party will return intoHertfordshire this winter. I will read it to you:""When my brother left us yesterday, he imagined that the business whichtook him to London might be concluded in three or four days; but as weare certain it cannot be so, and at the same time convinced that whenCharles gets to town he will be in no hurry to leave it again, we havedetermined on following him thither, that he may not be obliged to spendhis vacant hours in a comfortless hotel. Many of my acquaintances arealready there for the winter; I wish that I could hear that you, mydearest friend, had any intention of making one of the crowd--but ofthat I despair. I sincerely hope your Christmas in Hertfordshire mayabound in the gaieties which that season generally brings, and that yourbeaux will be so numerous as to prevent your feeling the loss of thethree of whom we shall deprive you.""It is evident by this," added Jane, "that he comes back no more thiswinter.""It is only evident that Miss Bingley does not mean that he _should_.""Why will you think so? It must be his own doing. He is his ownmaster. But you do not know _all_. I _will_ read you the passage whichparticularly hurts me. I will have no reserves from _you_.""Mr. Darcy is impatient to see his sister; and, to confess the truth,_we_ are scarcely less eager to meet her again. I really do not thinkGeorgiana Darcy has her equal for beauty, elegance, and accomplishments;and the affection she inspires in Louisa and myself is heightened intosomething still more interesting, from the hope we dare entertain ofher being hereafter our sister. I do not know whether I ever beforementioned to you my feelings on this subject; but I will not leave thecountry without confiding them, and I trust you will not esteem themunreasonable. My brother admires her greatly already; he will havefrequent opportunity now of seeing her on the most intimate footing;her relations all wish the connection as much as his own; and a sister'spartiality is not misleading me, I think, when I call Charles mostcapable of engaging any woman's heart. With all these circumstances tofavour an attachment, and nothing to prevent it, am I wrong, my dearestJane, in indulging the hope of an event which will secure the happinessof so many?""What do you think of _this_ sentence, my dear Lizzy?" said Jane as shefinished it. "Is it not clear enough? Does it not expressly declare thatCaroline neither expects nor wishes me to be her sister; that she isperfectly convinced of her brother's indifference; and that if shesuspects the nature of my feelings for him, she means (most kindly!) toput me on my guard? Can there be any other opinion on the subject?""Yes, there can; for mine is totally different. Will you hear it?""Most willingly.""You shall have it in a few words. Miss Bingley sees that her brother isin love with you, and wants him to marry Miss Darcy. She follows himto town in hope of keeping him there, and tries to persuade you that hedoes not care about you."Jane shook her head."Indeed, Jane, you ought to believe me. No one who has ever seen youtogether can doubt his affection. Miss Bingley, I am sure, cannot. Sheis not such a simpleton. Could she have seen half as much love in Mr.Darcy for herself, she would have ordered her wedding clothes. But thecase is this: We are not rich enough or grand enough for them; and sheis the more anxious to get Miss Darcy for her brother, from the notionthat when there has been _one_ intermarriage, she may have less troublein achieving a second; in which there is certainly some ingenuity, andI dare say it would succeed, if Miss de Bourgh were out of the way. But,my dearest Jane, you cannot seriously imagine that because Miss Bingleytells you her brother greatly admires Miss Darcy, he is in the smallestdegree less sensible of _your_ merit than when he took leave of you onTuesday, or that it will be in her power to persuade him that, insteadof being in love with you, he is very much in love with her friend.""If we thought alike of Miss Bingley," replied Jane, "yourrepresentation of all this might make me quite easy. But I know thefoundation is unjust. Caroline is incapable of wilfully deceivinganyone; and all that I can hope in this case is that she is deceivingherself.""That is right. You could not have started a more happy idea, since youwill not take comfort in mine. Believe her to be deceived, by all means.You have now done your duty by her, and must fret no longer.""But, my dear sister, can I be happy, even supposing the best, inaccepting a man whose sisters and friends are all wishing him to marryelsewhere?""You must decide for yourself," said Elizabeth; "and if, upon maturedeliberation, you find that the misery of disobliging his two sisters ismore than equivalent to the happiness of being his wife, I advise you byall means to refuse him.""How can you talk so?" said Jane, faintly smiling. "You must know thatthough I should be exceedingly grieved at their disapprobation, I couldnot hesitate.""I did not think you would; and that being the case, I cannot consideryour situation with much compassion.""But if he returns no more this winter, my choice will never berequired. A thousand things may arise in six months!"The idea of his returning no more Elizabeth treated with the utmostcontempt. It appeared to her merely the suggestion of Caroline'sinterested wishes, and she could not for a moment suppose that thosewishes, however openly or artfully spoken, could influence a young manso totally independent of everyone.She represented to her sister as forcibly as possible what she felton the subject, and had soon the pleasure of seeing its happy effect.Jane's temper was not desponding, and she was gradually led to hope,though the diffidence of affection sometimes overcame the hope, thatBingley would return to Netherfield and answer every wish of her heart.They agreed that Mrs. Bennet should only hear of the departure of thefamily, without being alarmed on the score of the gentleman's conduct;but even this partial communication gave her a great deal of concern,and she bewailed it as exceedingly unlucky that the ladies should happento go away just as they were all getting so intimate together. Afterlamenting it, however, at some length, she had the consolation that Mr.Bingley would be soon down again and soon dining at Longbourn, and theconclusion of all was the comfortable declaration, that though he hadbeen invited only to a family dinner, she would take care to have twofull courses.Chapter 22The Bennets were engaged to dine with the Lucases and again during thechief of the day was Miss Lucas so kind as to listen to Mr. Collins.Elizabeth took an opportunity of thanking her. "It keeps him in goodhumour," said she, "and I am more obliged to you than I can express."Charlotte assured her friend of her satisfaction in being useful, andthat it amply repaid her for the little sacrifice of her time. This wasvery amiable, but Charlotte's kindness extended farther than Elizabethhad any conception of; its object was nothing else than to secure herfrom any return of Mr. Collins's addresses, by engaging them towardsherself. Such was Miss Lucas's scheme; and appearances were sofavourable, that when they parted at night, she would have felt almostsecure of success if he had not been to leave Hertfordshire so verysoon. But here she did injustice to the fire and independence of hischaracter, for it led him to escape out of Longbourn House the nextmorning with admirable slyness, and hasten to Lucas Lodge to throwhimself at her feet. He was anxious to avoid the notice of his cousins,from a conviction that if they saw him depart, they could not fail toconjecture his design, and he was not willing to have the attempt knowntill its success might be known likewise; for though feeling almostsecure, and with reason, for Charlotte had been tolerably encouraging,he was comparatively diffident since the adventure of Wednesday.His reception, however, was of the most flattering kind. Miss Lucasperceived him from an upper window as he walked towards the house, andinstantly set out to meet him accidentally in the lane. But little hadshe dared to hope that so much love and eloquence awaited her there.In as short a time as Mr. Collins's long speeches would allow,everything was settled between them to the satisfaction of both; and asthey entered the house he earnestly entreated her to name the day thatwas to make him the happiest of men; and though such a solicitation mustbe waived for the present, the lady felt no inclination to trifle withhis happiness. The stupidity with which he was favoured by nature mustguard his courtship from any charm that could make a woman wish for itscontinuance; and Miss Lucas, who accepted him solely from the pureand disinterested desire of an establishment, cared not how soon thatestablishment were gained.Sir William and Lady Lucas were speedily applied to for their consent;and it was bestowed with a most joyful alacrity. Mr. Collins's presentcircumstances made it a most eligible match for their daughter, to whomthey could give little fortune; and his prospects of future wealth wereexceedingly fair. Lady Lucas began directly to calculate, with moreinterest than the matter had ever excited before, how many years longerMr. Bennet was likely to live; and Sir William gave it as his decidedopinion, that whenever Mr. Collins should be in possession of theLongbourn estate, it would be highly expedient that both he and his wifeshould make their appearance at St. James's. The whole family, in short,were properly overjoyed on the occasion. The younger girls formed hopesof _coming out_ a year or two sooner than they might otherwise havedone; and the boys were relieved from their apprehension of Charlotte'sdying an old maid. Charlotte herself was tolerably composed. She hadgained her point, and had time to consider of it. Her reflections werein general satisfactory. Mr. Collins, to be sure, was neither sensiblenor agreeable; his society was irksome, and his attachment to her mustbe imaginary. But still he would be her husband. Without thinking highlyeither of men or matrimony, marriage had always been her object; it wasthe only provision for well-educated young women of small fortune,and however uncertain of giving happiness, must be their pleasantestpreservative from want. This preservative she had now obtained; and atthe age of twenty-seven, without having ever been handsome, she felt allthe good luck of it. The least agreeable circumstance in the businesswas the surprise it must occasion to Elizabeth Bennet, whose friendshipshe valued beyond that of any other person. Elizabeth would wonder,and probably would blame her; and though her resolution was not to beshaken, her feelings must be hurt by such a disapprobation. She resolvedto give her the information herself, and therefore charged Mr. Collins,when he returned to Longbourn to dinner, to drop no hint of what hadpassed before any of the family. A promise of secrecy was of course verydutifully given, but it could not be kept without difficulty; for thecuriosity excited by his long absence burst forth in such very directquestions on his return as required some ingenuity to evade, and he wasat the same time exercising great self-denial, for he was longing topublish his prosperous love.As he was to begin his journey too early on the morrow to see any of thefamily, the ceremony of leave-taking was performed when the ladies movedfor the night; and Mrs. Bennet, with great politeness and cordiality,said how happy they should be to see him at Longbourn again, wheneverhis engagements might allow him to visit them."My dear madam," he replied, "this invitation is particularlygratifying, because it is what I have been hoping to receive; andyou may be very certain that I shall avail myself of it as soon aspossible."They were all astonished; and Mr. Bennet, who could by no means wish forso speedy a return, immediately said:"But is there not danger of Lady Catherine's disapprobation here, mygood sir? You had better neglect your relations than run the risk ofoffending your patroness.""My dear sir," replied Mr. Collins, "I am particularly obliged to youfor this friendly caution, and you may depend upon my not taking somaterial a step without her ladyship's concurrence.""You cannot be too much upon your guard. Risk anything rather than herdispleasure; and if you find it likely to be raised by your coming to usagain, which I should think exceedingly probable, stay quietly at home,and be satisfied that _we_ shall take no offence.""Believe me, my dear sir, my gratitude is warmly excited by suchaffectionate attention; and depend upon it, you will speedily receivefrom me a letter of thanks for this, and for every other mark of yourregard during my stay in Hertfordshire. As for my fair cousins, thoughmy absence may not be long enough to render it necessary, I shall nowtake the liberty of wishing them health and happiness, not excepting mycousin Elizabeth."With proper civilities the ladies then withdrew; all of them equallysurprised that he meditated a quick return. Mrs. Bennet wished tounderstand by it that he thought of paying his addresses to one of heryounger girls, and Mary might have been prevailed on to accept him.She rated his abilities much higher than any of the others; there wasa solidity in his reflections which often struck her, and though by nomeans so clever as herself, she thought that if encouraged to readand improve himself by such an example as hers, he might become a veryagreeable companion. But on the following morning, every hope of thiskind was done away. Miss Lucas called soon after breakfast, and in aprivate conference with Elizabeth related the event of the day before.The possibility of Mr. Collins's fancying himself in love with herfriend had once occurred to Elizabeth within the last day or two; butthat Charlotte could encourage him seemed almost as far frompossibility as she could encourage him herself, and her astonishment wasconsequently so great as to overcome at first the bounds of decorum, andshe could not help crying out:"Engaged to Mr. Collins! My dear Charlotte--impossible!"The steady countenance which Miss Lucas had commanded in telling herstory, gave way to a momentary confusion here on receiving so direct areproach; though, as it was no more than she expected, she soon regainedher composure, and calmly replied:"Why should you be surprised, my dear Eliza? Do you think it incrediblethat Mr. Collins should be able to procure any woman's good opinion,because he was not so happy as to succeed with you?"But Elizabeth had now recollected herself, and making a strong effortfor it, was able to assure with tolerable firmness that the prospect oftheir relationship was highly grateful to her, and that she wished herall imaginable happiness."I see what you are feeling," replied Charlotte. "You must be surprised,very much surprised--so lately as Mr. Collins was wishing to marryyou. But when you have had time to think it over, I hope you will besatisfied with what I have done. I am not romantic, you know; I neverwas. I ask only a comfortable home; and considering Mr. Collins'scharacter, connection, and situation in life, I am convinced that mychance of happiness with him is as fair as most people can boast onentering the marriage state."Elizabeth quietly answered "Undoubtedly;" and after an awkward pause,they returned to the rest of the family. Charlotte did not stay muchlonger, and Elizabeth was then left to reflect on what she had heard.It was a long time before she became at all reconciled to the idea of sounsuitable a match. The strangeness of Mr. Collins's making two offersof marriage within three days was nothing in comparison of his being nowaccepted. She had always felt that Charlotte's opinion of matrimony wasnot exactly like her own, but she had not supposed it to be possiblethat, when called into action, she would have sacrificed every betterfeeling to worldly advantage. Charlotte the wife of Mr. Collins was amost humiliating picture! And to the pang of a friend disgracing herselfand sunk in her esteem, was added the distressing conviction that itwas impossible for that friend to be tolerably happy in the lot she hadchosen.Chapter 23Elizabeth was sitting with her mother and sisters, reflecting on whatshe had heard, and doubting whether she was authorised to mentionit, when Sir William Lucas himself appeared, sent by his daughter, toannounce her engagement to the family. With many compliments to them,and much self-gratulation on the prospect of a connection between thehouses, he unfolded the matter--to an audience not merely wondering, butincredulous; for Mrs. Bennet, with more perseverance than politeness,protested he must be entirely mistaken; and Lydia, always unguarded andoften uncivil, boisterously exclaimed:"Good Lord! Sir William, how can you tell such a story? Do not you knowthat Mr. Collins wants to marry Lizzy?"Nothing less than the complaisance of a courtier could have bornewithout anger such treatment; but Sir William's good breeding carriedhim through it all; and though he begged leave to be positive as to thetruth of his information, he listened to all their impertinence with themost forbearing courtesy.Elizabeth, feeling it incumbent on her to relieve him from so unpleasanta situation, now put herself forward to confirm his account, bymentioning her prior knowledge of it from Charlotte herself; andendeavoured to put a stop to the exclamations of her mother and sistersby the earnestness of her congratulations to Sir William, in which shewas readily joined by Jane, and by making a variety of remarks on thehappiness that might be expected from the match, the excellent characterof Mr. Collins, and the convenient distance of Hunsford from London.Mrs. Bennet was in fact too much overpowered to say a great deal whileSir William remained; but no sooner had he left them than her feelingsfound a rapid vent. In the first place, she persisted in disbelievingthe whole of the matter; secondly, she was very sure that Mr. Collinshad been taken in; thirdly, she trusted that they would never behappy together; and fourthly, that the match might be broken off. Twoinferences, however, were plainly deduced from the whole: one, thatElizabeth was the real cause of the mischief; and the other that sheherself had been barbarously misused by them all; and on these twopoints she principally dwelt during the rest of the day. Nothing couldconsole and nothing could appease her. Nor did that day wear out herresentment. A week elapsed before she could see Elizabeth withoutscolding her, a month passed away before she could speak to Sir Williamor Lady Lucas without being rude, and many months were gone before shecould at all forgive their daughter.Mr. Bennet's emotions were much more tranquil on the occasion, and suchas he did experience he pronounced to be of a most agreeable sort; forit gratified him, he said, to discover that Charlotte Lucas, whom he hadbeen used to think tolerably sensible, was as foolish as his wife, andmore foolish than his daughter!Jane confessed herself a little surprised at the match; but she saidless of her astonishment than of her earnest desire for their happiness;nor could Elizabeth persuade her to consider it as improbable. Kittyand Lydia were far from envying Miss Lucas, for Mr. Collins was only aclergyman; and it affected them in no other way than as a piece of newsto spread at Meryton.Lady Lucas could not be insensible of triumph on being able to retorton Mrs. Bennet the comfort of having a daughter well married; and shecalled at Longbourn rather oftener than usual to say how happy she was,though Mrs. Bennet's sour looks and ill-natured remarks might have beenenough to drive happiness away.Between Elizabeth and Charlotte there was a restraint which kept themmutually silent on the subject; and Elizabeth felt persuaded thatno real confidence could ever subsist between them again. Herdisappointment in Charlotte made her turn with fonder regard to hersister, of whose rectitude and delicacy she was sure her opinion couldnever be shaken, and for whose happiness she grew daily more anxious,as Bingley had now been gone a week and nothing more was heard of hisreturn.Jane had sent Caroline an early answer to her letter, and was countingthe days till she might reasonably hope to hear again. The promisedletter of thanks from Mr. Collins arrived on Tuesday, addressed totheir father, and written with all the solemnity of gratitude which atwelvemonth's abode in the family might have prompted. After discharginghis conscience on that head, he proceeded to inform them, with manyrapturous expressions, of his happiness in having obtained the affectionof their amiable neighbour, Miss Lucas, and then explained that it wasmerely with the view of enjoying her society that he had been so readyto close with their kind wish of seeing him again at Longbourn, whitherhe hoped to be able to return on Monday fortnight; for Lady Catherine,he added, so heartily approved his marriage, that she wished it to takeplace as soon as possible, which he trusted would be an unanswerableargument with his amiable Charlotte to name an early day for making himthe happiest of men.Mr. Collins's return into Hertfordshire was no longer a matter ofpleasure to Mrs. Bennet. On the contrary, she was as much disposed tocomplain of it as her husband. It was very strange that he should cometo Longbourn instead of to Lucas Lodge; it was also very inconvenientand exceedingly troublesome. She hated having visitors in the housewhile her health was so indifferent, and lovers were of all people themost disagreeable. Such were the gentle murmurs of Mrs. Bennet, andthey gave way only to the greater distress of Mr. Bingley's continuedabsence.Neither Jane nor Elizabeth were comfortable on this subject. Day afterday passed away without bringing any other tidings of him than thereport which shortly prevailed in Meryton of his coming no more toNetherfield the whole winter; a report which highly incensed Mrs.Bennet, and which she never failed to contradict as a most scandalousfalsehood.Even Elizabeth began to fear--not that Bingley was indifferent--but thathis sisters would be successful in keeping him away. Unwilling asshe was to admit an idea so destructive of Jane's happiness, and sodishonorable to the stability of her lover, she could not prevent itsfrequently occurring. The united efforts of his two unfeeling sistersand of his overpowering friend, assisted by the attractions of MissDarcy and the amusements of London might be too much, she feared, forthe strength of his attachment.As for Jane, _her_ anxiety under this suspense was, of course, morepainful than Elizabeth's, but whatever she felt she was desirous ofconcealing, and between herself and Elizabeth, therefore, the subjectwas never alluded to. But as no such delicacy restrained her mother,an hour seldom passed in which she did not talk of Bingley, express herimpatience for his arrival, or even require Jane to confess that if hedid not come back she would think herself very ill used. It neededall Jane's steady mildness to bear these attacks with tolerabletranquillity.Mr. Collins returned most punctually on Monday fortnight, but hisreception at Longbourn was not quite so gracious as it had been on hisfirst introduction. He was too happy, however, to need much attention;and luckily for the others, the business of love-making relieved themfrom a great deal of his company. The chief of every day was spent byhim at Lucas Lodge, and he sometimes returned to Longbourn only in timeto make an apology for his absence before the family went to bed.Mrs. Bennet was really in a most pitiable state. The very mention ofanything concerning the match threw her into an agony of ill-humour,and wherever she went she was sure of hearing it talked of. The sightof Miss Lucas was odious to her. As her successor in that house, sheregarded her with jealous abhorrence. Whenever Charlotte came to seethem, she concluded her to be anticipating the hour of possession; andwhenever she spoke in a low voice to Mr. Collins, was convinced thatthey were talking of the Longbourn estate, and resolving to turn herselfand her daughters out of the house, as soon as Mr. Bennet were dead. Shecomplained bitterly of all this to her husband."Indeed, Mr. Bennet," said she, "it is very hard to think that CharlotteLucas should ever be mistress of this house, that I should be forced tomake way for _her_, and live to see her take her place in it!""My dear, do not give way to such gloomy thoughts. Let us hope forbetter things. Let us flatter ourselves that I may be the survivor."This was not very consoling to Mrs. Bennet, and therefore, instead ofmaking any answer, she went on as before."I cannot bear to think that they should have all this estate. If it wasnot for the entail, I should not mind it.""What should not you mind?""I should not mind anything at all.""Let us be thankful that you are preserved from a state of suchinsensibility.""I never can be thankful, Mr. Bennet, for anything about the entail. Howanyone could have the conscience to entail away an estate from one's owndaughters, I cannot understand; and all for the sake of Mr. Collins too!Why should _he_ have it more than anybody else?""I leave it to yourself to determine," said Mr. Bennet.Chapter 24Miss Bingley's letter arrived, and put an end to doubt. The very firstsentence conveyed the assurance of their being all settled in London forthe winter, and concluded with her brother's regret at not having hadtime to pay his respects to his friends in Hertfordshire before he leftthe country.Hope was over, entirely over; and when Jane could attend to the restof the letter, she found little, except the professed affection of thewriter, that could give her any comfort. Miss Darcy's praise occupiedthe chief of it. Her many attractions were again dwelt on, and Carolineboasted joyfully of their increasing intimacy, and ventured to predictthe accomplishment of the wishes which had been unfolded in her formerletter. She wrote also with great pleasure of her brother's being aninmate of Mr. Darcy's house, and mentioned with raptures some plans ofthe latter with regard to new furniture.Elizabeth, to whom Jane very soon communicated the chief of all this,heard it in silent indignation. Her heart was divided between concernfor her sister, and resentment against all others. To Caroline'sassertion of her brother's being partial to Miss Darcy she paid nocredit. That he was really fond of Jane, she doubted no more than shehad ever done; and much as she had always been disposed to like him, shecould not think without anger, hardly without contempt, on that easinessof temper, that want of proper resolution, which now made him the slaveof his designing friends, and led him to sacrifice of his own happinessto the caprice of their inclination. Had his own happiness, however,been the only sacrifice, he might have been allowed to sport with it inwhatever manner he thought best, but her sister's was involved in it, asshe thought he must be sensible himself. It was a subject, in short,on which reflection would be long indulged, and must be unavailing. Shecould think of nothing else; and yet whether Bingley's regard had reallydied away, or were suppressed by his friends' interference; whetherhe had been aware of Jane's attachment, or whether it had escaped hisobservation; whatever were the case, though her opinion of him must bematerially affected by the difference, her sister's situation remainedthe same, her peace equally wounded.A day or two passed before Jane had courage to speak of her feelings toElizabeth; but at last, on Mrs. Bennet's leaving them together, after alonger irritation than usual about Netherfield and its master, she couldnot help saying:"Oh, that my dear mother had more command over herself! She can have noidea of the pain she gives me by her continual reflections on him. ButI will not repine. It cannot last long. He will be forgot, and we shallall be as we were before."Elizabeth looked at her sister with incredulous solicitude, but saidnothing."You doubt me," cried Jane, slightly colouring; "indeed, you haveno reason. He may live in my memory as the most amiable man of myacquaintance, but that is all. I have nothing either to hope or fear,and nothing to reproach him with. Thank God! I have not _that_ pain. Alittle time, therefore--I shall certainly try to get the better."With a stronger voice she soon added, "I have this comfort immediately,that it has not been more than an error of fancy on my side, and that ithas done no harm to anyone but myself.""My dear Jane!" exclaimed Elizabeth, "you are too good. Your sweetnessand disinterestedness are really angelic; I do not know what to sayto you. I feel as if I had never done you justice, or loved you as youdeserve."Miss Bennet eagerly disclaimed all extraordinary merit, and threw backthe praise on her sister's warm affection."Nay," said Elizabeth, "this is not fair. _You_ wish to think all theworld respectable, and are hurt if I speak ill of anybody. I only wantto think _you_ perfect, and you set yourself against it. Do notbe afraid of my running into any excess, of my encroaching on yourprivilege of universal good-will. You need not. There are few peoplewhom I really love, and still fewer of whom I think well. The more I seeof the world, the more am I dissatisfied with it; and every day confirmsmy belief of the inconsistency of all human characters, and of thelittle dependence that can be placed on the appearance of merit orsense. I have met with two instances lately, one I will not mention; theother is Charlotte's marriage. It is unaccountable! In every view it isunaccountable!""My dear Lizzy, do not give way to such feelings as these. They willruin your happiness. You do not make allowance enough for differenceof situation and temper. Consider Mr. Collins's respectability, andCharlotte's steady, prudent character. Remember that she is one of alarge family; that as to fortune, it is a most eligible match; and beready to believe, for everybody's sake, that she may feel something likeregard and esteem for our cousin.""To oblige you, I would try to believe almost anything, but no one elsecould be benefited by such a belief as this; for were I persuaded thatCharlotte had any regard for him, I should only think worse of herunderstanding than I now do of her heart. My dear Jane, Mr. Collins is aconceited, pompous, narrow-minded, silly man; you know he is, as well asI do; and you must feel, as well as I do, that the woman who married himcannot have a proper way of thinking. You shall not defend her, thoughit is Charlotte Lucas. You shall not, for the sake of one individual,change the meaning of principle and integrity, nor endeavour to persuadeyourself or me, that selfishness is prudence, and insensibility ofdanger security for happiness.""I must think your language too strong in speaking of both," repliedJane; "and I hope you will be convinced of it by seeing them happytogether. But enough of this. You alluded to something else. Youmentioned _two_ instances. I cannot misunderstand you, but I entreatyou, dear Lizzy, not to pain me by thinking _that person_ to blame, andsaying your opinion of him is sunk. We must not be so ready to fancyourselves intentionally injured. We must not expect a lively young manto be always so guarded and circumspect. It is very often nothing butour own vanity that deceives us. Women fancy admiration means more thanit does.""And men take care that they should.""If it is designedly done, they cannot be justified; but I have no ideaof there being so much design in the world as some persons imagine.""I am far from attributing any part of Mr. Bingley's conduct to design,"said Elizabeth; "but without scheming to do wrong, or to make othersunhappy, there may be error, and there may be misery. Thoughtlessness,want of attention to other people's feelings, and want of resolution,will do the business.""And do you impute it to either of those?""Yes; to the last. But if I go on, I shall displease you by saying whatI think of persons you esteem. Stop me whilst you can.""You persist, then, in supposing his sisters influence him?""Yes, in conjunction with his friend.""I cannot believe it. Why should they try to influence him? They canonly wish his happiness; and if he is attached to me, no other woman cansecure it.""Your first position is false. They may wish many things besides hishappiness; they may wish his increase of wealth and consequence; theymay wish him to marry a girl who has all the importance of money, greatconnections, and pride.""Beyond a doubt, they _do_ wish him to choose Miss Darcy," replied Jane;"but this may be from better feelings than you are supposing. They haveknown her much longer than they have known me; no wonder if they loveher better. But, whatever may be their own wishes, it is very unlikelythey should have opposed their brother's. What sister would thinkherself at liberty to do it, unless there were something veryobjectionable? If they believed him attached to me, they would not tryto part us; if he were so, they could not succeed. By supposing such anaffection, you make everybody acting unnaturally and wrong, and me mostunhappy. Do not distress me by the idea. I am not ashamed of having beenmistaken--or, at least, it is light, it is nothing in comparison of whatI should feel in thinking ill of him or his sisters. Let me take it inthe best light, in the light in which it may be understood."Elizabeth could not oppose such a wish; and from this time Mr. Bingley'sname was scarcely ever mentioned between them.Mrs. Bennet still continued to wonder and repine at his returning nomore, and though a day seldom passed in which Elizabeth did not accountfor it clearly, there was little chance of her ever considering it withless perplexity. Her daughter endeavoured to convince her of what shedid not believe herself, that his attentions to Jane had been merely theeffect of a common and transient liking, which ceased when he saw herno more; but though the probability of the statement was admitted atthe time, she had the same story to repeat every day. Mrs. Bennet's bestcomfort was that Mr. Bingley must be down again in the summer.Mr. Bennet treated the matter differently. "So, Lizzy," said he one day,"your sister is crossed in love, I find. I congratulate her. Next tobeing married, a girl likes to be crossed a little in love now and then.It is something to think of, and it gives her a sort of distinctionamong her companions. When is your turn to come? You will hardly bear tobe long outdone by Jane. Now is your time. Here are officers enough inMeryton to disappoint all the young ladies in the country. Let Wickhambe _your_ man. He is a pleasant fellow, and would jilt you creditably.""Thank you, sir, but a less agreeable man would satisfy me. We must notall expect Jane's good fortune.""True," said Mr. Bennet, "but it is a comfort to think that whatever ofthat kind may befall you, you have an affectionate mother who will makethe most of it."Mr. Wickham's society was of material service in dispelling the gloomwhich the late perverse occurrences had thrown on many of the Longbournfamily. They saw him often, and to his other recommendations was nowadded that of general unreserve. The whole of what Elizabeth had alreadyheard, his claims on Mr. Darcy, and all that he had suffered from him,was now openly acknowledged and publicly canvassed; and everybody waspleased to know how much they had always disliked Mr. Darcy before theyhad known anything of the matter.Miss Bennet was the only creature who could suppose there might beany extenuating circumstances in the case, unknown to the societyof Hertfordshire; her mild and steady candour always pleaded forallowances, and urged the possibility of mistakes--but by everybody elseMr. Darcy was condemned as the worst of men.Chapter 25After a week spent in professions of love and schemes of felicity,Mr. Collins was called from his amiable Charlotte by the arrival ofSaturday. The pain of separation, however, might be alleviated on hisside, by preparations for the reception of his bride; as he had reasonto hope, that shortly after his return into Hertfordshire, the day wouldbe fixed that was to make him the happiest of men. He took leave of hisrelations at Longbourn with as much solemnity as before; wished his faircousins health and happiness again, and promised their father anotherletter of thanks.On the following Monday, Mrs. Bennet had the pleasure of receivingher brother and his wife, who came as usual to spend the Christmasat Longbourn. Mr. Gardiner was a sensible, gentlemanlike man, greatlysuperior to his sister, as well by nature as education. The Netherfieldladies would have had difficulty in believing that a man who livedby trade, and within view of his own warehouses, could have been sowell-bred and agreeable. Mrs. Gardiner, who was several years youngerthan Mrs. Bennet and Mrs. Phillips, was an amiable, intelligent, elegantwoman, and a great favourite with all her Longbourn nieces. Between thetwo eldest and herself especially, there subsisted a particular regard.They had frequently been staying with her in town.The first part of Mrs. Gardiner's business on her arrival was todistribute her presents and describe the newest fashions. When this wasdone she had a less active part to play. It became her turn to listen.Mrs. Bennet had many grievances to relate, and much to complain of. Theyhad all been very ill-used since she last saw her sister. Two of hergirls had been upon the point of marriage, and after all there wasnothing in it."I do not blame Jane," she continued, "for Jane would have got Mr.Bingley if she could. But Lizzy! Oh, sister! It is very hard to thinkthat she might have been Mr. Collins's wife by this time, had it notbeen for her own perverseness. He made her an offer in this very room,and she refused him. The consequence of it is, that Lady Lucas will havea daughter married before I have, and that the Longbourn estate is justas much entailed as ever. The Lucases are very artful people indeed,sister. They are all for what they can get. I am sorry to say it ofthem, but so it is. It makes me very nervous and poorly, to be thwartedso in my own family, and to have neighbours who think of themselvesbefore anybody else. However, your coming just at this time is thegreatest of comforts, and I am very glad to hear what you tell us, oflong sleeves."Mrs. Gardiner, to whom the chief of this news had been given before,in the course of Jane and Elizabeth's correspondence with her, made hersister a slight answer, and, in compassion to her nieces, turned theconversation.When alone with Elizabeth afterwards, she spoke more on the subject. "Itseems likely to have been a desirable match for Jane," said she. "I amsorry it went off. But these things happen so often! A young man, suchas you describe Mr. Bingley, so easily falls in love with a pretty girlfor a few weeks, and when accident separates them, so easily forgetsher, that these sort of inconsistencies are very frequent.""An excellent consolation in its way," said Elizabeth, "but it will notdo for _us_. We do not suffer by _accident_. It does not oftenhappen that the interference of friends will persuade a young man ofindependent fortune to think no more of a girl whom he was violently inlove with only a few days before.""But that expression of 'violently in love' is so hackneyed, sodoubtful, so indefinite, that it gives me very little idea. It is asoften applied to feelings which arise from a half-hour's acquaintance,as to a real, strong attachment. Pray, how _violent was_ Mr. Bingley'slove?""I never saw a more promising inclination; he was growing quiteinattentive to other people, and wholly engrossed by her. Every timethey met, it was more decided and remarkable. At his own ball heoffended two or three young ladies, by not asking them to dance; and Ispoke to him twice myself, without receiving an answer. Could there befiner symptoms? Is not general incivility the very essence of love?""Oh, yes!--of that kind of love which I suppose him to have felt. PoorJane! I am sorry for her, because, with her disposition, she may not getover it immediately. It had better have happened to _you_, Lizzy; youwould have laughed yourself out of it sooner. But do you think shewould be prevailed upon to go back with us? Change of scene might beof service--and perhaps a little relief from home may be as useful asanything."Elizabeth was exceedingly pleased with this proposal, and felt persuadedof her sister's ready acquiescence."I hope," added Mrs. Gardiner, "that no consideration with regard tothis young man will influence her. We live in so different a part oftown, all our connections are so different, and, as you well know, we goout so little, that it is very improbable that they should meet at all,unless he really comes to see her.""And _that_ is quite impossible; for he is now in the custody of hisfriend, and Mr. Darcy would no more suffer him to call on Jane in sucha part of London! My dear aunt, how could you think of it? Mr. Darcy mayperhaps have _heard_ of such a place as Gracechurch Street, but hewould hardly think a month's ablution enough to cleanse him from itsimpurities, were he once to enter it; and depend upon it, Mr. Bingleynever stirs without him.""So much the better. I hope they will not meet at all. But does not Janecorrespond with his sister? _She_ will not be able to help calling.""She will drop the acquaintance entirely."But in spite of the certainty in which Elizabeth affected to place thispoint, as well as the still more interesting one of Bingley's beingwithheld from seeing Jane, she felt a solicitude on the subject whichconvinced her, on examination, that she did not consider it entirelyhopeless. It was possible, and sometimes she thought it probable, thathis affection might be reanimated, and the influence of his friendssuccessfully combated by the more natural influence of Jane'sattractions.Miss Bennet accepted her aunt's invitation with pleasure; and theBingleys were no otherwise in her thoughts at the same time, than as shehoped by Caroline's not living in the same house with her brother,she might occasionally spend a morning with her, without any danger ofseeing him.The Gardiners stayed a week at Longbourn; and what with the Phillipses,the Lucases, and the officers, there was not a day without itsengagement. Mrs. Bennet had so carefully provided for the entertainmentof her brother and sister, that they did not once sit down to a familydinner. When the engagement was for home, some of the officers alwaysmade part of it--of which officers Mr. Wickham was sure to be one; andon these occasions, Mrs. Gardiner, rendered suspicious by Elizabeth'swarm commendation, narrowly observed them both. Without supposing them,from what she saw, to be very seriously in love, their preferenceof each other was plain enough to make her a little uneasy; andshe resolved to speak to Elizabeth on the subject before she leftHertfordshire, and represent to her the imprudence of encouraging suchan attachment.To Mrs. Gardiner, Wickham had one means of affording pleasure,unconnected with his general powers. About ten or a dozen years ago,before her marriage, she had spent a considerable time in that verypart of Derbyshire to which he belonged. They had, therefore, manyacquaintances in common; and though Wickham had been little there sincethe death of Darcy's father, it was yet in his power to give her fresherintelligence of her former friends than she had been in the way ofprocuring.Mrs. Gardiner had seen Pemberley, and known the late Mr. Darcy bycharacter perfectly well. Here consequently was an inexhaustible subjectof discourse. In comparing her recollection of Pemberley with the minutedescription which Wickham could give, and in bestowing her tribute ofpraise on the character of its late possessor, she was delighting bothhim and herself. On being made acquainted with the present Mr. Darcy'streatment of him, she tried to remember some of that gentleman'sreputed disposition when quite a lad which might agree with it, andwas confident at last that she recollected having heard Mr. FitzwilliamDarcy formerly spoken of as a very proud, ill-natured boy.Chapter 26Mrs. Gardiner's caution to Elizabeth was punctually and kindly givenon the first favourable opportunity of speaking to her alone; afterhonestly telling her what she thought, she thus went on:"You are too sensible a girl, Lizzy, to fall in love merely becauseyou are warned against it; and, therefore, I am not afraid of speakingopenly. Seriously, I would have you be on your guard. Do not involveyourself or endeavour to involve him in an affection which the wantof fortune would make so very imprudent. I have nothing to say against_him_; he is a most interesting young man; and if he had the fortune heought to have, I should think you could not do better. But as it is, youmust not let your fancy run away with you. You have sense, and we allexpect you to use it. Your father would depend on _your_ resolution andgood conduct, I am sure. You must not disappoint your father.""My dear aunt, this is being serious indeed.""Yes, and I hope to engage you to be serious likewise.""Well, then, you need not be under any alarm. I will take care ofmyself, and of Mr. Wickham too. He shall not be in love with me, if Ican prevent it.""Elizabeth, you are not serious now.""I beg your pardon, I will try again. At present I am not in love withMr. Wickham; no, I certainly am not. But he is, beyond all comparison,the most agreeable man I ever saw--and if he becomes really attached tome--I believe it will be better that he should not. I see the imprudenceof it. Oh! _that_ abominable Mr. Darcy! My father's opinion of me doesme the greatest honour, and I should be miserable to forfeit it. Myfather, however, is partial to Mr. Wickham. In short, my dear aunt, Ishould be very sorry to be the means of making any of you unhappy; butsince we see every day that where there is affection, young peopleare seldom withheld by immediate want of fortune from entering intoengagements with each other, how can I promise to be wiser than so manyof my fellow-creatures if I am tempted, or how am I even to know that itwould be wisdom to resist? All that I can promise you, therefore, is notto be in a hurry. I will not be in a hurry to believe myself his firstobject. When I am in company with him, I will not be wishing. In short,I will do my best.""Perhaps it will be as well if you discourage his coming here so veryoften. At least, you should not _remind_ your mother of inviting him.""As I did the other day," said Elizabeth with a conscious smile: "verytrue, it will be wise in me to refrain from _that_. But do not imaginethat he is always here so often. It is on your account that he has beenso frequently invited this week. You know my mother's ideas as to thenecessity of constant company for her friends. But really, and upon myhonour, I will try to do what I think to be the wisest; and now I hopeyou are satisfied."Her aunt assured her that she was, and Elizabeth having thanked her forthe kindness of her hints, they parted; a wonderful instance of advicebeing given on such a point, without being resented.Mr. Collins returned into Hertfordshire soon after it had been quittedby the Gardiners and Jane; but as he took up his abode with the Lucases,his arrival was no great inconvenience to Mrs. Bennet. His marriage wasnow fast approaching, and she was at length so far resigned as to thinkit inevitable, and even repeatedly to say, in an ill-natured tone, thatshe "_wished_ they might be happy." Thursday was to be the wedding day,and on Wednesday Miss Lucas paid her farewell visit; and when sherose to take leave, Elizabeth, ashamed of her mother's ungracious andreluctant good wishes, and sincerely affected herself, accompanied herout of the room. As they went downstairs together, Charlotte said:"I shall depend on hearing from you very often, Eliza.""_That_ you certainly shall.""And I have another favour to ask you. Will you come and see me?""We shall often meet, I hope, in Hertfordshire.""I am not likely to leave Kent for some time. Promise me, therefore, tocome to Hunsford."Elizabeth could not refuse, though she foresaw little pleasure in thevisit."My father and Maria are coming to me in March," added Charlotte, "and Ihope you will consent to be of the party. Indeed, Eliza, you will be aswelcome as either of them."The wedding took place; the bride and bridegroom set off for Kent fromthe church door, and everybody had as much to say, or to hear, onthe subject as usual. Elizabeth soon heard from her friend; and theircorrespondence was as regular and frequent as it had ever been; thatit should be equally unreserved was impossible. Elizabeth could neveraddress her without feeling that all the comfort of intimacy was over,and though determined not to slacken as a correspondent, it was for thesake of what had been, rather than what was. Charlotte's first letterswere received with a good deal of eagerness; there could not but becuriosity to know how she would speak of her new home, how she wouldlike Lady Catherine, and how happy she would dare pronounce herself tobe; though, when the letters were read, Elizabeth felt that Charlotteexpressed herself on every point exactly as she might have foreseen. Shewrote cheerfully, seemed surrounded with comforts, and mentioned nothingwhich she could not praise. The house, furniture, neighbourhood, androads, were all to her taste, and Lady Catherine's behaviour was mostfriendly and obliging. It was Mr. Collins's picture of Hunsford andRosings rationally softened; and Elizabeth perceived that she must waitfor her own visit there to know the rest.Jane had already written a few lines to her sister to announce theirsafe arrival in London; and when she wrote again, Elizabeth hoped itwould be in her power to say something of the Bingleys.Her impatience for this second letter was as well rewarded as impatiencegenerally is. Jane had been a week in town without either seeing orhearing from Caroline. She accounted for it, however, by supposing thather last letter to her friend from Longbourn had by some accident beenlost."My aunt," she continued, "is going to-morrow into that part of thetown, and I shall take the opportunity of calling in Grosvenor Street."She wrote again when the visit was paid, and she had seen Miss Bingley."I did not think Caroline in spirits," were her words, "but she was veryglad to see me, and reproached me for giving her no notice of my comingto London. I was right, therefore, my last letter had never reachedher. I inquired after their brother, of course. He was well, but so muchengaged with Mr. Darcy that they scarcely ever saw him. I found thatMiss Darcy was expected to dinner. I wish I could see her. My visit wasnot long, as Caroline and Mrs. Hurst were going out. I dare say I shallsee them soon here."Elizabeth shook her head over this letter. It convinced her thataccident only could discover to Mr. Bingley her sister's being in town.Four weeks passed away, and Jane saw nothing of him. She endeavoured topersuade herself that she did not regret it; but she could no longer beblind to Miss Bingley's inattention. After waiting at home every morningfor a fortnight, and inventing every evening a fresh excuse for her, thevisitor did at last appear; but the shortness of her stay, and yet more,the alteration of her manner would allow Jane to deceive herself nolonger. The letter which she wrote on this occasion to her sister willprove what she felt."My dearest Lizzy will, I am sure, be incapable of triumphing in herbetter judgement, at my expense, when I confess myself to have beenentirely deceived in Miss Bingley's regard for me. But, my dear sister,though the event has proved you right, do not think me obstinate if Istill assert that, considering what her behaviour was, my confidence wasas natural as your suspicion. I do not at all comprehend her reason forwishing to be intimate with me; but if the same circumstances were tohappen again, I am sure I should be deceived again. Caroline did notreturn my visit till yesterday; and not a note, not a line, did Ireceive in the meantime. When she did come, it was very evident thatshe had no pleasure in it; she made a slight, formal apology, for notcalling before, said not a word of wishing to see me again, and wasin every respect so altered a creature, that when she went away I wasperfectly resolved to continue the acquaintance no longer. I pity,though I cannot help blaming her. She was very wrong in singling me outas she did; I can safely say that every advance to intimacy began onher side. But I pity her, because she must feel that she has been actingwrong, and because I am very sure that anxiety for her brother is thecause of it. I need not explain myself farther; and though _we_ knowthis anxiety to be quite needless, yet if she feels it, it will easilyaccount for her behaviour to me; and so deservedly dear as he is tohis sister, whatever anxiety she must feel on his behalf is natural andamiable. I cannot but wonder, however, at her having any such fears now,because, if he had at all cared about me, we must have met, long ago.He knows of my being in town, I am certain, from something she saidherself; and yet it would seem, by her manner of talking, as if shewanted to persuade herself that he is really partial to Miss Darcy. Icannot understand it. If I were not afraid of judging harshly, I shouldbe almost tempted to say that there is a strong appearance of duplicityin all this. But I will endeavour to banish every painful thought,and think only of what will make me happy--your affection, and theinvariable kindness of my dear uncle and aunt. Let me hear from you verysoon. Miss Bingley said something of his never returning to Netherfieldagain, of giving up the house, but not with any certainty. We had betternot mention it. I am extremely glad that you have such pleasant accountsfrom our friends at Hunsford. Pray go to see them, with Sir William andMaria. I am sure you will be very comfortable there.--Yours, etc."This letter gave Elizabeth some pain; but her spirits returned as sheconsidered that Jane would no longer be duped, by the sister at least.All expectation from the brother was now absolutely over. She would noteven wish for a renewal of his attentions. His character sunk onevery review of it; and as a punishment for him, as well as a possibleadvantage to Jane, she seriously hoped he might really soon marry Mr.Darcy's sister, as by Wickham's account, she would make him abundantlyregret what he had thrown away.Mrs. Gardiner about this time reminded Elizabeth of her promiseconcerning that gentleman, and required information; and Elizabethhad such to send as might rather give contentment to her aunt than toherself. His apparent partiality had subsided, his attentions were over,he was the admirer of some one else. Elizabeth was watchful enough tosee it all, but she could see it and write of it without material pain.Her heart had been but slightly touched, and her vanity was satisfiedwith believing that _she_ would have been his only choice, had fortunepermitted it. The sudden acquisition of ten thousand pounds was the mostremarkable charm of the young lady to whom he was now rendering himselfagreeable; but Elizabeth, less clear-sighted perhaps in this case thanin Charlotte's, did not quarrel with him for his wish of independence.Nothing, on the contrary, could be more natural; and while able tosuppose that it cost him a few struggles to relinquish her, she wasready to allow it a wise and desirable measure for both, and could verysincerely wish him happy.All this was acknowledged to Mrs. Gardiner; and after relating thecircumstances, she thus went on: "I am now convinced, my dear aunt, thatI have never been much in love; for had I really experienced that pureand elevating passion, I should at present detest his very name, andwish him all manner of evil. But my feelings are not only cordialtowards _him_; they are even impartial towards Miss King. I cannot findout that I hate her at all, or that I am in the least unwilling tothink her a very good sort of girl. There can be no love in all this. Mywatchfulness has been effectual; and though I certainly should be a moreinteresting object to all my acquaintances were I distractedly in lovewith him, I cannot say that I regret my comparative insignificance.Importance may sometimes be purchased too dearly. Kitty and Lydia takehis defection much more to heart than I do. They are young in theways of the world, and not yet open to the mortifying conviction thathandsome young men must have something to live on as well as the plain."Chapter 27With no greater events than these in the Longbourn family, and otherwisediversified by little beyond the walks to Meryton, sometimes dirty andsometimes cold, did January and February pass away. March was to takeElizabeth to Hunsford. She had not at first thought very seriously ofgoing thither; but Charlotte, she soon found, was depending on the planand she gradually learned to consider it herself with greater pleasureas well as greater certainty. Absence had increased her desire of seeingCharlotte again, and weakened her disgust of Mr. Collins. Therewas novelty in the scheme, and as, with such a mother and suchuncompanionable sisters, home could not be faultless, a little changewas not unwelcome for its own sake. The journey would moreover give hera peep at Jane; and, in short, as the time drew near, she would havebeen very sorry for any delay. Everything, however, went on smoothly,and was finally settled according to Charlotte's first sketch. She wasto accompany Sir William and his second daughter. The improvementof spending a night in London was added in time, and the plan becameperfect as plan could be.The only pain was in leaving her father, who would certainly miss her,and who, when it came to the point, so little liked her going, that hetold her to write to him, and almost promised to answer her letter.The farewell between herself and Mr. Wickham was perfectly friendly; onhis side even more. His present pursuit could not make him forget thatElizabeth had been the first to excite and to deserve his attention, thefirst to listen and to pity, the first to be admired; and in his mannerof bidding her adieu, wishing her every enjoyment, reminding her ofwhat she was to expect in Lady Catherine de Bourgh, and trusting theiropinion of her--their opinion of everybody--would always coincide, therewas a solicitude, an interest which she felt must ever attach her tohim with a most sincere regard; and she parted from him convinced that,whether married or single, he must always be her model of the amiableand pleasing.Her fellow-travellers the next day were not of a kind to make herthink him less agreeable. Sir William Lucas, and his daughter Maria, agood-humoured girl, but as empty-headed as himself, had nothing to saythat could be worth hearing, and were listened to with about as muchdelight as the rattle of the chaise. Elizabeth loved absurdities, butshe had known Sir William's too long. He could tell her nothing new ofthe wonders of his presentation and knighthood; and his civilities wereworn out, like his information.It was a journey of only twenty-four miles, and they began it so earlyas to be in Gracechurch Street by noon. As they drove to Mr. Gardiner'sdoor, Jane was at a drawing-room window watching their arrival; whenthey entered the passage she was there to welcome them, and Elizabeth,looking earnestly in her face, was pleased to see it healthful andlovely as ever. On the stairs were a troop of little boys and girls,whose eagerness for their cousin's appearance would not allow them towait in the drawing-room, and whose shyness, as they had not seenher for a twelvemonth, prevented their coming lower. All was joy andkindness. The day passed most pleasantly away; the morning in bustle andshopping, and the evening at one of the theatres.Elizabeth then contrived to sit by her aunt. Their first object was hersister; and she was more grieved than astonished to hear, in reply toher minute inquiries, that though Jane always struggled to support herspirits, there were periods of dejection. It was reasonable, however,to hope that they would not continue long. Mrs. Gardiner gave her theparticulars also of Miss Bingley's visit in Gracechurch Street, andrepeated conversations occurring at different times between Jane andherself, which proved that the former had, from her heart, given up theacquaintance.Mrs. Gardiner then rallied her niece on Wickham's desertion, andcomplimented her on bearing it so well."But my dear Elizabeth," she added, "what sort of girl is Miss King? Ishould be sorry to think our friend mercenary.""Pray, my dear aunt, what is the difference in matrimonial affairs,between the mercenary and the prudent motive? Where does discretion end,and avarice begin? Last Christmas you were afraid of his marrying me,because it would be imprudent; and now, because he is trying to geta girl with only ten thousand pounds, you want to find out that he ismercenary.""If you will only tell me what sort of girl Miss King is, I shall knowwhat to think.""She is a very good kind of girl, I believe. I know no harm of her.""But he paid her not the smallest attention till her grandfather's deathmade her mistress of this fortune.""No--why should he? If it were not allowable for him to gain _my_affections because I had no money, what occasion could there be formaking love to a girl whom he did not care about, and who was equallypoor?""But there seems an indelicacy in directing his attentions towards herso soon after this event.""A man in distressed circumstances has not time for all those elegantdecorums which other people may observe. If _she_ does not object to it,why should _we_?""_Her_ not objecting does not justify _him_. It only shows her beingdeficient in something herself--sense or feeling.""Well," cried Elizabeth, "have it as you choose. _He_ shall bemercenary, and _she_ shall be foolish.""No, Lizzy, that is what I do _not_ choose. I should be sorry, you know,to think ill of a young man who has lived so long in Derbyshire.""Oh! if that is all, I have a very poor opinion of young men who live inDerbyshire; and their intimate friends who live in Hertfordshire are notmuch better. I am sick of them all. Thank Heaven! I am going to-morrowwhere I shall find a man who has not one agreeable quality, who hasneither manner nor sense to recommend him. Stupid men are the only onesworth knowing, after all.""Take care, Lizzy; that speech savours strongly of disappointment."Before they were separated by the conclusion of the play, she had theunexpected happiness of an invitation to accompany her uncle and aunt ina tour of pleasure which they proposed taking in the summer."We have not determined how far it shall carry us," said Mrs. Gardiner,"but, perhaps, to the Lakes."No scheme could have been more agreeable to Elizabeth, and heracceptance of the invitation was most ready and grateful. "Oh, my dear,dear aunt," she rapturously cried, "what delight! what felicity! Yougive me fresh life and vigour. Adieu to disappointment and spleen. Whatare young men to rocks and mountains? Oh! what hours of transportwe shall spend! And when we _do_ return, it shall not be like othertravellers, without being able to give one accurate idea of anything. We_will_ know where we have gone--we _will_ recollect what we have seen.Lakes, mountains, and rivers shall not be jumbled together in ourimaginations; nor when we attempt to describe any particular scene,will we begin quarreling about its relative situation. Let _our_first effusions be less insupportable than those of the generality oftravellers."Chapter 28Every object in the next day's journey was new and interesting toElizabeth; and her spirits were in a state of enjoyment; for she hadseen her sister looking so well as to banish all fear for her health,and the prospect of her northern tour was a constant source of delight.When they left the high road for the lane to Hunsford, every eye was insearch of the Parsonage, and every turning expected to bring it in view.The palings of Rosings Park was their boundary on one side. Elizabethsmiled at the recollection of all that she had heard of its inhabitants.At length the Parsonage was discernible. The garden sloping to theroad, the house standing in it, the green pales, and the laurel hedge,everything declared they were arriving. Mr. Collins and Charlotteappeared at the door, and the carriage stopped at the small gate whichled by a short gravel walk to the house, amidst the nods and smiles ofthe whole party. In a moment they were all out of the chaise, rejoicingat the sight of each other. Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with theliveliest pleasure, and Elizabeth was more and more satisfied withcoming when she found herself so affectionately received. She sawinstantly that her cousin's manners were not altered by his marriage;his formal civility was just what it had been, and he detained her someminutes at the gate to hear and satisfy his inquiries after all herfamily. They were then, with no other delay than his pointing out theneatness of the entrance, taken into the house; and as soon as theywere in the parlour, he welcomed them a second time, with ostentatiousformality to his humble abode, and punctually repeated all his wife'soffers of refreshment.Elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory; and she could not helpin fancying that in displaying the good proportion of the room, itsaspect and its furniture, he addressed himself particularly to her,as if wishing to make her feel what she had lost in refusing him. Butthough everything seemed neat and comfortable, she was not able togratify him by any sigh of repentance, and rather looked with wonder ather friend that she could have so cheerful an air with such a companion.When Mr. Collins said anything of which his wife might reasonably beashamed, which certainly was not unseldom, she involuntarily turned hereye on Charlotte. Once or twice she could discern a faint blush; butin general Charlotte wisely did not hear. After sitting long enough toadmire every article of furniture in the room, from the sideboard tothe fender, to give an account of their journey, and of all that hadhappened in London, Mr. Collins invited them to take a stroll in thegarden, which was large and well laid out, and to the cultivation ofwhich he attended himself. To work in this garden was one of his mostrespectable pleasures; and Elizabeth admired the command of countenancewith which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise, andowned she encouraged it as much as possible. Here, leading the waythrough every walk and cross walk, and scarcely allowing them aninterval to utter the praises he asked for, every view was pointed outwith a minuteness which left beauty entirely behind. He could number thefields in every direction, and could tell how many trees there were inthe most distant clump. But of all the views which his garden, or whichthe country or kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with theprospect of Rosings, afforded by an opening in the trees that borderedthe park nearly opposite the front of his house. It was a handsomemodern building, well situated on rising ground.From his garden, Mr. Collins would have led them round his two meadows;but the ladies, not having shoes to encounter the remains of a whitefrost, turned back; and while Sir William accompanied him, Charlottetook her sister and friend over the house, extremely well pleased,probably, to have the opportunity of showing it without her husband'shelp. It was rather small, but well built and convenient; and everythingwas fitted up and arranged with a neatness and consistency of whichElizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit. When Mr. Collins could beforgotten, there was really an air of great comfort throughout, and byCharlotte's evident enjoyment of it, Elizabeth supposed he must be oftenforgotten.She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the country. Itwas spoken of again while they were at dinner, when Mr. Collins joiningin, observed:"Yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Lady Catherinede Bourgh on the ensuing Sunday at church, and I need not say you willbe delighted with her. She is all affability and condescension, and Idoubt not but you will be honoured with some portion of her noticewhen service is over. I have scarcely any hesitation in saying shewill include you and my sister Maria in every invitation with which shehonours us during your stay here. Her behaviour to my dear Charlotte ischarming. We dine at Rosings twice every week, and are never allowedto walk home. Her ladyship's carriage is regularly ordered for us. I_should_ say, one of her ladyship's carriages, for she has several.""Lady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman indeed," addedCharlotte, "and a most attentive neighbour.""Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say. She is the sort ofwoman whom one cannot regard with too much deference."The evening was spent chiefly in talking over Hertfordshire news,and telling again what had already been written; and when it closed,Elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber, had to meditate uponCharlotte's degree of contentment, to understand her address in guiding,and composure in bearing with, her husband, and to acknowledge that itwas all done very well. She had also to anticipate how her visitwould pass, the quiet tenor of their usual employments, the vexatiousinterruptions of Mr. Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse withRosings. A lively imagination soon settled it all.About the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting readyfor a walk, a sudden noise below seemed to speak the whole house inconfusion; and, after listening a moment, she heard somebody runningup stairs in a violent hurry, and calling loudly after her. She openedthe door and met Maria in the landing place, who, breathless withagitation, cried out--"Oh, my dear Eliza! pray make haste and come into the dining-room, forthere is such a sight to be seen! I will not tell you what it is. Makehaste, and come down this moment."Elizabeth asked questions in vain; Maria would tell her nothing more,and down they ran into the dining-room, which fronted the lane, inquest of this wonder; It was two ladies stopping in a low phaeton at thegarden gate."And is this all?" cried Elizabeth. "I expected at least that the pigswere got into the garden, and here is nothing but Lady Catherine and herdaughter.""La! my dear," said Maria, quite shocked at the mistake, "it is notLady Catherine. The old lady is Mrs. Jenkinson, who lives with them;the other is Miss de Bourgh. Only look at her. She is quite a littlecreature. Who would have thought that she could be so thin and small?""She is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all this wind.Why does she not come in?""Oh, Charlotte says she hardly ever does. It is the greatest of favourswhen Miss de Bourgh comes in.""I like her appearance," said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas. "Shelooks sickly and cross. Yes, she will do for him very well. She willmake him a very proper wife."Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversationwith the ladies; and Sir William, to Elizabeth's high diversion, wasstationed in the doorway, in earnest contemplation of the greatnessbefore him, and constantly bowing whenever Miss de Bourgh looked thatway.At length there was nothing more to be said; the ladies drove on, andthe others returned into the house. Mr. Collins no sooner saw the twogirls than he began to congratulate them on their good fortune, whichCharlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was askedto dine at Rosings the next day.Chapter 29Mr. Collins's triumph, in consequence of this invitation, was complete.The power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wonderingvisitors, and of letting them see her civility towards himself and hiswife, was exactly what he had wished for; and that an opportunityof doing it should be given so soon, was such an instance of LadyCatherine's condescension, as he knew not how to admire enough."I confess," said he, "that I should not have been at all surprised byher ladyship's asking us on Sunday to drink tea and spend the evening atRosings. I rather expected, from my knowledge of her affability, that itwould happen. But who could have foreseen such an attention as this? Whocould have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine there(an invitation, moreover, including the whole party) so immediatelyafter your arrival!""I am the less surprised at what has happened," replied Sir William,"from that knowledge of what the manners of the great really are, whichmy situation in life has allowed me to acquire. About the court, suchinstances of elegant breeding are not uncommon."Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but theirvisit to Rosings. Mr. Collins was carefully instructing them in whatthey were to expect, that the sight of such rooms, so many servants, andso splendid a dinner, might not wholly overpower them.When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to Elizabeth--"Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel. LadyCatherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us whichbecomes herself and her daughter. I would advise you merely to put onwhatever of your clothes is superior to the rest--there is no occasionfor anything more. Lady Catherine will not think the worse of youfor being simply dressed. She likes to have the distinction of rankpreserved."While they were dressing, he came two or three times to their differentdoors, to recommend their being quick, as Lady Catherine very muchobjected to be kept waiting for her dinner. Such formidable accounts ofher ladyship, and her manner of living, quite frightened Maria Lucaswho had been little used to company, and she looked forward to herintroduction at Rosings with as much apprehension as her father had doneto his presentation at St. James's.As the weather was fine, they had a pleasant walk of about half amile across the park. Every park has its beauty and its prospects; andElizabeth saw much to be pleased with, though she could not be in suchraptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene to inspire, and was butslightly affected by his enumeration of the windows in front of thehouse, and his relation of what the glazing altogether had originallycost Sir Lewis de Bourgh.When they ascended the steps to the hall, Maria's alarm was everymoment increasing, and even Sir William did not look perfectly calm.Elizabeth's courage did not fail her. She had heard nothing of LadyCatherine that spoke her awful from any extraordinary talents ormiraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money or rank she thoughtshe could witness without trepidation.From the entrance-hall, of which Mr. Collins pointed out, with arapturous air, the fine proportion and the finished ornaments, theyfollowed the servants through an ante-chamber, to the room where LadyCatherine, her daughter, and Mrs. Jenkinson were sitting. Her ladyship,with great condescension, arose to receive them; and as Mrs. Collins hadsettled it with her husband that the office of introduction shouldbe hers, it was performed in a proper manner, without any of thoseapologies and thanks which he would have thought necessary.In spite of having been at St. James's, Sir William was so completelyawed by the grandeur surrounding him, that he had but just courageenough to make a very low bow, and take his seat without saying a word;and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on the edgeof her chair, not knowing which way to look. Elizabeth found herselfquite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before hercomposedly. Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman, with strongly-markedfeatures, which might once have been handsome. Her air was notconciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to make hervisitors forget their inferior rank. She was not rendered formidable bysilence; but whatever she said was spoken in so authoritative a tone,as marked her self-importance, and brought Mr. Wickham immediately toElizabeth's mind; and from the observation of the day altogether, shebelieved Lady Catherine to be exactly what he represented.When, after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportmentshe soon found some resemblance of Mr. Darcy, she turned her eyes on thedaughter, she could almost have joined in Maria's astonishment at herbeing so thin and so small. There was neither in figure nor face anylikeness between the ladies. Miss de Bourgh was pale and sickly; herfeatures, though not plain, were insignificant; and she spoke verylittle, except in a low voice, to Mrs. Jenkinson, in whose appearancethere was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listeningto what she said, and placing a screen in the proper direction beforeher eyes.After sitting a few minutes, they were all sent to one of the windows toadmire the view, Mr. Collins attending them to point out its beauties,and Lady Catherine kindly informing them that it was much better worthlooking at in the summer.The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the servants andall the articles of plate which Mr. Collins had promised; and, as he hadlikewise foretold, he took his seat at the bottom of the table, by herladyship's desire, and looked as if he felt that life could furnishnothing greater. He carved, and ate, and praised with delightedalacrity; and every dish was commended, first by him and then by SirWilliam, who was now enough recovered to echo whatever his son-in-lawsaid, in a manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear.But Lady Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, andgave most gracious smiles, especially when any dish on the table proveda novelty to them. The party did not supply much conversation. Elizabethwas ready to speak whenever there was an opening, but she was seatedbetween Charlotte and Miss de Bourgh--the former of whom was engaged inlistening to Lady Catherine, and the latter said not a word to her alldinner-time. Mrs. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how littleMiss de Bourgh ate, pressing her to try some other dish, and fearingshe was indisposed. Maria thought speaking out of the question, and thegentlemen did nothing but eat and admire.When the ladies returned to the drawing-room, there was little tobe done but to hear Lady Catherine talk, which she did without anyintermission till coffee came in, delivering her opinion on everysubject in so decisive a manner, as proved that she was not used tohave her judgement controverted. She inquired into Charlotte's domesticconcerns familiarly and minutely, gave her a great deal of advice asto the management of them all; told her how everything ought to beregulated in so small a family as hers, and instructed her as to thecare of her cows and her poultry. Elizabeth found that nothing wasbeneath this great lady's attention, which could furnish her with anoccasion of dictating to others. In the intervals of her discoursewith Mrs. Collins, she addressed a variety of questions to Maria andElizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she knewthe least, and who she observed to Mrs. Collins was a very genteel,pretty kind of girl. She asked her, at different times, how many sistersshe had, whether they were older or younger than herself, whether any ofthem were likely to be married, whether they were handsome, where theyhad been educated, what carriage her father kept, and what had beenher mother's maiden name? Elizabeth felt all the impertinence ofher questions but answered them very composedly. Lady Catherine thenobserved,"Your father's estate is entailed on Mr. Collins, I think. For yoursake," turning to Charlotte, "I am glad of it; but otherwise I see nooccasion for entailing estates from the female line. It was not thoughtnecessary in Sir Lewis de Bourgh's family. Do you play and sing, MissBennet?""A little.""Oh! then--some time or other we shall be happy to hear you. Ourinstrument is a capital one, probably superior to----You shall try itsome day. Do your sisters play and sing?""One of them does.""Why did not you all learn? You ought all to have learned. The MissWebbs all play, and their father has not so good an income as yours. Doyou draw?""No, not at all.""What, none of you?""Not one.""That is very strange. But I suppose you had no opportunity. Your mothershould have taken you to town every spring for the benefit of masters.""My mother would have had no objection, but my father hates London.""Has your governess left you?""We never had any governess.""No governess! How was that possible? Five daughters brought up at homewithout a governess! I never heard of such a thing. Your mother musthave been quite a slave to your education."Elizabeth could hardly help smiling as she assured her that had not beenthe case."Then, who taught you? who attended to you? Without a governess, youmust have been neglected.""Compared with some families, I believe we were; but such of us aswished to learn never wanted the means. We were always encouraged toread, and had all the masters that were necessary. Those who chose to beidle, certainly might.""Aye, no doubt; but that is what a governess will prevent, and if I hadknown your mother, I should have advised her most strenuously to engageone. I always say that nothing is to be done in education without steadyand regular instruction, and nobody but a governess can give it. It iswonderful how many families I have been the means of supplying in thatway. I am always glad to get a young person well placed out. Four niecesof Mrs. Jenkinson are most delightfully situated through my means; andit was but the other day that I recommended another young person,who was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quitedelighted with her. Mrs. Collins, did I tell you of Lady Metcalf'scalling yesterday to thank me? She finds Miss Pope a treasure. 'LadyCatherine,' said she, 'you have given me a treasure.' Are any of youryounger sisters out, Miss Bennet?""Yes, ma'am, all.""All! What, all five out at once? Very odd! And you only the second. Theyounger ones out before the elder ones are married! Your younger sistersmust be very young?""Yes, my youngest is not sixteen. Perhaps _she_ is full young to bemuch in company. But really, ma'am, I think it would be very hard uponyounger sisters, that they should not have their share of society andamusement, because the elder may not have the means or inclination tomarry early. The last-born has as good a right to the pleasures of youthas the first. And to be kept back on _such_ a motive! I think it wouldnot be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind.""Upon my word," said her ladyship, "you give your opinion very decidedlyfor so young a person. Pray, what is your age?""With three younger sisters grown up," replied Elizabeth, smiling, "yourladyship can hardly expect me to own it."Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer;and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature who had everdared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence."You cannot be more than twenty, I am sure, therefore you need notconceal your age.""I am not one-and-twenty."When the gentlemen had joined them, and tea was over, the card-tableswere placed. Lady Catherine, Sir William, and Mr. and Mrs. Collins satdown to quadrille; and as Miss de Bourgh chose to play at cassino, thetwo girls had the honour of assisting Mrs. Jenkinson to make up herparty. Their table was superlatively stupid. Scarcely a syllable wasuttered that did not relate to the game, except when Mrs. Jenkinsonexpressed her fears of Miss de Bourgh's being too hot or too cold, orhaving too much or too little light. A great deal more passed at theother table. Lady Catherine was generally speaking--stating the mistakesof the three others, or relating some anecdote of herself. Mr. Collinswas employed in agreeing to everything her ladyship said, thanking herfor every fish he won, and apologising if he thought he won too many.Sir William did not say much. He was storing his memory with anecdotesand noble names.When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose,the tables were broken up, the carriage was offered to Mrs. Collins,gratefully accepted and immediately ordered. The party then gatheredround the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine what weather they wereto have on the morrow. From these instructions they were summoned bythe arrival of the coach; and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mr.Collins's side and as many bows on Sir William's they departed. As soonas they had driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by her cousinto give her opinion of all that she had seen at Rosings, which, forCharlotte's sake, she made more favourable than it really was. But hercommendation, though costing her some trouble, could by no means satisfyMr. Collins, and he was very soon obliged to take her ladyship's praiseinto his own hands.Chapter 30Sir William stayed only a week at Hunsford, but his visit was longenough to convince him of his daughter's being most comfortably settled,and of her possessing such a husband and such a neighbour as were notoften met with. While Sir William was with them, Mr. Collins devoted hismorning to driving him out in his gig, and showing him the country; butwhen he went away, the whole family returned to their usual employments,and Elizabeth was thankful to find that they did not see more of hercousin by the alteration, for the chief of the time between breakfastand dinner was now passed by him either at work in the garden or inreading and writing, and looking out of the window in his own book-room,which fronted the road. The room in which the ladies sat was backwards.Elizabeth had at first rather wondered that Charlotte should not preferthe dining-parlour for common use; it was a better sized room, and had amore pleasant aspect; but she soon saw that her friend had an excellentreason for what she did, for Mr. Collins would undoubtedly have beenmuch less in his own apartment, had they sat in one equally lively; andshe gave Charlotte credit for the arrangement.From the drawing-room they could distinguish nothing in the lane, andwere indebted to Mr. Collins for the knowledge of what carriages wentalong, and how often especially Miss de Bourgh drove by in her phaeton,which he never failed coming to inform them of, though it happenedalmost every day. She not unfrequently stopped at the Parsonage, andhad a few minutes' conversation with Charlotte, but was scarcely everprevailed upon to get out.Very few days passed in which Mr. Collins did not walk to Rosings, andnot many in which his wife did not think it necessary to go likewise;and till Elizabeth recollected that there might be other family livingsto be disposed of, she could not understand the sacrifice of so manyhours. Now and then they were honoured with a call from her ladyship,and nothing escaped her observation that was passing in the room duringthese visits. She examined into their employments, looked at their work,and advised them to do it differently; found fault with the arrangementof the furniture; or detected the housemaid in negligence; and if sheaccepted any refreshment, seemed to do it only for the sake of findingout that Mrs. Collins's joints of meat were too large for her family.Elizabeth soon perceived, that though this great lady was not incommission of the peace of the county, she was a most active magistratein her own parish, the minutest concerns of which were carried to herby Mr. Collins; and whenever any of the cottagers were disposed tobe quarrelsome, discontented, or too poor, she sallied forth into thevillage to settle their differences, silence their complaints, and scoldthem into harmony and plenty.The entertainment of dining at Rosings was repeated about twice a week;and, allowing for the loss of Sir William, and there being only onecard-table in the evening, every such entertainment was the counterpartof the first. Their other engagements were few, as the style of livingin the neighbourhood in general was beyond Mr. Collins's reach. This,however, was no evil to Elizabeth, and upon the whole she spent her timecomfortably enough; there were half-hours of pleasant conversation withCharlotte, and the weather was so fine for the time of year that she hadoften great enjoyment out of doors. Her favourite walk, and where shefrequently went while the others were calling on Lady Catherine, wasalong the open grove which edged that side of the park, where there wasa nice sheltered path, which no one seemed to value but herself, andwhere she felt beyond the reach of Lady Catherine's curiosity.In this quiet way, the first fortnight of her visit soon passed away.Easter was approaching, and the week preceding it was to bring anaddition to the family at Rosings, which in so small a circle must beimportant. Elizabeth had heard soon after her arrival that Mr. Darcy wasexpected there in the course of a few weeks, and though there were notmany of her acquaintances whom she did not prefer, his coming wouldfurnish one comparatively new to look at in their Rosings parties, andshe might be amused in seeing how hopeless Miss Bingley's designs on himwere, by his behaviour to his cousin, for whom he was evidentlydestined by Lady Catherine, who talked of his coming with the greatestsatisfaction, spoke of him in terms of the highest admiration, andseemed almost angry to find that he had already been frequently seen byMiss Lucas and herself.His arrival was soon known at the Parsonage; for Mr. Collins was walkingthe whole morning within view of the lodges opening into Hunsford Lane,in order to have the earliest assurance of it, and after making hisbow as the carriage turned into the Park, hurried home with the greatintelligence. On the following morning he hastened to Rosings to pay hisrespects. There were two nephews of Lady Catherine to require them, forMr. Darcy had brought with him a Colonel Fitzwilliam, the younger son ofhis uncle Lord ----, and, to the great surprise of all the party, whenMr. Collins returned, the gentlemen accompanied him. Charlotte had seenthem from her husband's room, crossing the road, and immediately runninginto the other, told the girls what an honour they might expect, adding:"I may thank you, Eliza, for this piece of civility. Mr. Darcy wouldnever have come so soon to wait upon me."Elizabeth had scarcely time to disclaim all right to the compliment,before their approach was announced by the door-bell, and shortlyafterwards the three gentlemen entered the room. Colonel Fitzwilliam,who led the way, was about thirty, not handsome, but in person andaddress most truly the gentleman. Mr. Darcy looked just as he had beenused to look in Hertfordshire--paid his compliments, with his usualreserve, to Mrs. Collins, and whatever might be his feelings toward herfriend, met her with every appearance of composure. Elizabeth merelycurtseyed to him without saying a word.Colonel Fitzwilliam entered into conversation directly with thereadiness and ease of a well-bred man, and talked very pleasantly; buthis cousin, after having addressed a slight observation on the house andgarden to Mrs. Collins, sat for some time without speaking to anybody.At length, however, his civility was so far awakened as to inquire ofElizabeth after the health of her family. She answered him in the usualway, and after a moment's pause, added:"My eldest sister has been in town these three months. Have you neverhappened to see her there?"She was perfectly sensible that he never had; but she wished to seewhether he would betray any consciousness of what had passed betweenthe Bingleys and Jane, and she thought he looked a little confused as heanswered that he had never been so fortunate as to meet Miss Bennet. Thesubject was pursued no farther, and the gentlemen soon afterwards wentaway.Chapter 31Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners were very much admired at the Parsonage,and the ladies all felt that he must add considerably to the pleasuresof their engagements at Rosings. It was some days, however, before theyreceived any invitation thither--for while there were visitors in thehouse, they could not be necessary; and it was not till Easter-day,almost a week after the gentlemen's arrival, that they were honoured bysuch an attention, and then they were merely asked on leaving church tocome there in the evening. For the last week they had seen very littleof Lady Catherine or her daughter. Colonel Fitzwilliam had called at theParsonage more than once during the time, but Mr. Darcy they had seenonly at church.The invitation was accepted of course, and at a proper hour they joinedthe party in Lady Catherine's drawing-room. Her ladyship receivedthem civilly, but it was plain that their company was by no means soacceptable as when she could get nobody else; and she was, in fact,almost engrossed by her nephews, speaking to them, especially to Darcy,much more than to any other person in the room.Colonel Fitzwilliam seemed really glad to see them; anything was awelcome relief to him at Rosings; and Mrs. Collins's pretty friend hadmoreover caught his fancy very much. He now seated himself by her, andtalked so agreeably of Kent and Hertfordshire, of travelling and stayingat home, of new books and music, that Elizabeth had never been half sowell entertained in that room before; and they conversed with so muchspirit and flow, as to draw the attention of Lady Catherine herself,as well as of Mr. Darcy. _His_ eyes had been soon and repeatedly turnedtowards them with a look of curiosity; and that her ladyship, after awhile, shared the feeling, was more openly acknowledged, for she did notscruple to call out:"What is that you are saying, Fitzwilliam? What is it you are talkingof? What are you telling Miss Bennet? Let me hear what it is.""We are speaking of music, madam," said he, when no longer able to avoida reply."Of music! Then pray speak aloud. It is of all subjects my delight. Imust have my share in the conversation if you are speaking of music.There are few people in England, I suppose, who have more true enjoymentof music than myself, or a better natural taste. If I had ever learnt,I should have been a great proficient. And so would Anne, if her healthhad allowed her to apply. I am confident that she would have performeddelightfully. How does Georgiana get on, Darcy?"Mr. Darcy spoke with affectionate praise of his sister's proficiency."I am very glad to hear such a good account of her," said LadyCatherine; "and pray tell her from me, that she cannot expect to excelif she does not practice a good deal.""I assure you, madam," he replied, "that she does not need such advice.She practises very constantly.""So much the better. It cannot be done too much; and when I next writeto her, I shall charge her not to neglect it on any account. I oftentell young ladies that no excellence in music is to be acquired withoutconstant practice. I have told Miss Bennet several times, that shewill never play really well unless she practises more; and though Mrs.Collins has no instrument, she is very welcome, as I have often toldher, to come to Rosings every day, and play on the pianoforte in Mrs.Jenkinson's room. She would be in nobody's way, you know, in that partof the house."Mr. Darcy looked a little ashamed of his aunt's ill-breeding, and madeno answer.When coffee was over, Colonel Fitzwilliam reminded Elizabeth of havingpromised to play to him; and she sat down directly to the instrument. Hedrew a chair near her. Lady Catherine listened to half a song, and thentalked, as before, to her other nephew; till the latter walked awayfrom her, and making with his usual deliberation towards the pianofortestationed himself so as to command a full view of the fair performer'scountenance. Elizabeth saw what he was doing, and at the firstconvenient pause, turned to him with an arch smile, and said:"You mean to frighten me, Mr. Darcy, by coming in all this state to hearme? I will not be alarmed though your sister _does_ play so well. Thereis a stubbornness about me that never can bear to be frightened at thewill of others. My courage always rises at every attempt to intimidateme.""I shall not say you are mistaken," he replied, "because you could notreally believe me to entertain any design of alarming you; and I havehad the pleasure of your acquaintance long enough to know that you findgreat enjoyment in occasionally professing opinions which in fact arenot your own."Elizabeth laughed heartily at this picture of herself, and said toColonel Fitzwilliam, "Your cousin will give you a very pretty notion ofme, and teach you not to believe a word I say. I am particularly unluckyin meeting with a person so able to expose my real character, in a partof the world where I had hoped to pass myself off with some degree ofcredit. Indeed, Mr. Darcy, it is very ungenerous in you to mention allthat you knew to my disadvantage in Hertfordshire--and, give me leave tosay, very impolitic too--for it is provoking me to retaliate, and suchthings may come out as will shock your relations to hear.""I am not afraid of you," said he, smilingly."Pray let me hear what you have to accuse him of," cried ColonelFitzwilliam. "I should like to know how he behaves among strangers.""You shall hear then--but prepare yourself for something very dreadful.The first time of my ever seeing him in Hertfordshire, you must know,was at a ball--and at this ball, what do you think he did? He dancedonly four dances, though gentlemen were scarce; and, to my certainknowledge, more than one young lady was sitting down in want of apartner. Mr. Darcy, you cannot deny the fact.""I had not at that time the honour of knowing any lady in the assemblybeyond my own party.""True; and nobody can ever be introduced in a ball-room. Well, ColonelFitzwilliam, what do I play next? My fingers wait your orders.""Perhaps," said Darcy, "I should have judged better, had I sought anintroduction; but I am ill-qualified to recommend myself to strangers.""Shall we ask your cousin the reason of this?" said Elizabeth, stilladdressing Colonel Fitzwilliam. "Shall we ask him why a man of sense andeducation, and who has lived in the world, is ill qualified to recommendhimself to strangers?""I can answer your question," said Fitzwilliam, "without applying tohim. It is because he will not give himself the trouble.""I certainly have not the talent which some people possess," said Darcy,"of conversing easily with those I have never seen before. I cannotcatch their tone of conversation, or appear interested in theirconcerns, as I often see done.""My fingers," said Elizabeth, "do not move over this instrument in themasterly manner which I see so many women's do. They have not the sameforce or rapidity, and do not produce the same expression. But then Ihave always supposed it to be my own fault--because I will not take thetrouble of practising. It is not that I do not believe _my_ fingers ascapable as any other woman's of superior execution."Darcy smiled and said, "You are perfectly right. You have employed yourtime much better. No one admitted to the privilege of hearing you canthink anything wanting. We neither of us perform to strangers."Here they were interrupted by Lady Catherine, who called out to knowwhat they were talking of. Elizabeth immediately began playing again.Lady Catherine approached, and, after listening for a few minutes, saidto Darcy:"Miss Bennet would not play at all amiss if she practised more, andcould have the advantage of a London master. She has a very good notionof fingering, though her taste is not equal to Anne's. Anne would havebeen a delightful performer, had her health allowed her to learn."Elizabeth looked at Darcy to see how cordially he assented to hiscousin's praise; but neither at that moment nor at any other could shediscern any symptom of love; and from the whole of his behaviour to Missde Bourgh she derived this comfort for Miss Bingley, that he might havebeen just as likely to marry _her_, had she been his relation.Lady Catherine continued her remarks on Elizabeth's performance, mixingwith them many instructions on execution and taste. Elizabeth receivedthem with all the forbearance of civility, and, at the request of thegentlemen, remained at the instrument till her ladyship's carriage wasready to take them all home.Chapter 32Elizabeth was sitting by herself the next morning, and writing to Janewhile Mrs. Collins and Maria were gone on business into the village,when she was startled by a ring at the door, the certain signal of avisitor. As she had heard no carriage, she thought it not unlikely tobe Lady Catherine, and under that apprehension was putting away herhalf-finished letter that she might escape all impertinent questions,when the door opened, and, to her very great surprise, Mr. Darcy, andMr. Darcy only, entered the room.He seemed astonished too on finding her alone, and apologised for hisintrusion by letting her know that he had understood all the ladies wereto be within.They then sat down, and when her inquiries after Rosings were made,seemed in danger of sinking into total silence. It was absolutelynecessary, therefore, to think of something, and in this emergencerecollecting _when_ she had seen him last in Hertfordshire, andfeeling curious to know what he would say on the subject of their hastydeparture, she observed:"How very suddenly you all quitted Netherfield last November, Mr. Darcy!It must have been a most agreeable surprise to Mr. Bingley to see youall after him so soon; for, if I recollect right, he went but the daybefore. He and his sisters were well, I hope, when you left London?""Perfectly so, I thank you."She found that she was to receive no other answer, and, after a shortpause added:"I think I have understood that Mr. Bingley has not much idea of everreturning to Netherfield again?""I have never heard him say so; but it is probable that he may spendvery little of his time there in the future. He has many friends, andis at a time of life when friends and engagements are continuallyincreasing.""If he means to be but little at Netherfield, it would be better forthe neighbourhood that he should give up the place entirely, for then wemight possibly get a settled family there. But, perhaps, Mr. Bingley didnot take the house so much for the convenience of the neighbourhood asfor his own, and we must expect him to keep it or quit it on the sameprinciple.""I should not be surprised," said Darcy, "if he were to give it up assoon as any eligible purchase offers."Elizabeth made no answer. She was afraid of talking longer of hisfriend; and, having nothing else to say, was now determined to leave thetrouble of finding a subject to him.He took the hint, and soon began with, "This seems a very comfortablehouse. Lady Catherine, I believe, did a great deal to it when Mr.Collins first came to Hunsford.""I believe she did--and I am sure she could not have bestowed herkindness on a more grateful object.""Mr. Collins appears to be very fortunate in his choice of a wife.""Yes, indeed, his friends may well rejoice in his having met with oneof the very few sensible women who would have accepted him, or have madehim happy if they had. My friend has an excellent understanding--thoughI am not certain that I consider her marrying Mr. Collins as thewisest thing she ever did. She seems perfectly happy, however, and in aprudential light it is certainly a very good match for her.""It must be very agreeable for her to be settled within so easy adistance of her own family and friends.""An easy distance, do you call it? It is nearly fifty miles.""And what is fifty miles of good road? Little more than half a day'sjourney. Yes, I call it a _very_ easy distance.""I should never have considered the distance as one of the _advantages_of the match," cried Elizabeth. "I should never have said Mrs. Collinswas settled _near_ her family.""It is a proof of your own attachment to Hertfordshire. Anything beyondthe very neighbourhood of Longbourn, I suppose, would appear far."As he spoke there was a sort of smile which Elizabeth fancied sheunderstood; he must be supposing her to be thinking of Jane andNetherfield, and she blushed as she answered:"I do not mean to say that a woman may not be settled too near herfamily. The far and the near must be relative, and depend on manyvarying circumstances. Where there is fortune to make the expenses oftravelling unimportant, distance becomes no evil. But that is not thecase _here_. Mr. and Mrs. Collins have a comfortable income, but notsuch a one as will allow of frequent journeys--and I am persuaded myfriend would not call herself _near_ her family under less than _half_the present distance."Mr. Darcy drew his chair a little towards her, and said, "_You_ cannothave a right to such very strong local attachment. _You_ cannot havebeen always at Longbourn."Elizabeth looked surprised. The gentleman experienced some change offeeling; he drew back his chair, took a newspaper from the table, andglancing over it, said, in a colder voice:"Are you pleased with Kent?"A short dialogue on the subject of the country ensued, on either sidecalm and concise--and soon put an end to by the entrance of Charlotteand her sister, just returned from her walk. The tete-a-tete surprisedthem. Mr. Darcy related the mistake which had occasioned his intrudingon Miss Bennet, and after sitting a few minutes longer without sayingmuch to anybody, went away."What can be the meaning of this?" said Charlotte, as soon as he wasgone. "My dear, Eliza, he must be in love with you, or he would neverhave called us in this familiar way."But when Elizabeth told of his silence, it did not seem very likely,even to Charlotte's wishes, to be the case; and after variousconjectures, they could at last only suppose his visit to proceed fromthe difficulty of finding anything to do, which was the more probablefrom the time of year. All field sports were over. Within doors therewas Lady Catherine, books, and a billiard-table, but gentlemen cannotalways be within doors; and in the nearness of the Parsonage, or thepleasantness of the walk to it, or of the people who lived in it, thetwo cousins found a temptation from this period of walking thitheralmost every day. They called at various times of the morning, sometimesseparately, sometimes together, and now and then accompanied by theiraunt. It was plain to them all that Colonel Fitzwilliam came because hehad pleasure in their society, a persuasion which of course recommendedhim still more; and Elizabeth was reminded by her own satisfaction inbeing with him, as well as by his evident admiration of her, of herformer favourite George Wickham; and though, in comparing them, she sawthere was less captivating softness in Colonel Fitzwilliam's manners,she believed he might have the best informed mind.But why Mr. Darcy came so often to the Parsonage, it was more difficultto understand. It could not be for society, as he frequently sat thereten minutes together without opening his lips; and when he did speak,it seemed the effect of necessity rather than of choice--a sacrificeto propriety, not a pleasure to himself. He seldom appeared reallyanimated. Mrs. Collins knew not what to make of him. ColonelFitzwilliam's occasionally laughing at his stupidity, proved that he wasgenerally different, which her own knowledge of him could not have toldher; and as she would liked to have believed this change the effectof love, and the object of that love her friend Eliza, she set herselfseriously to work to find it out. She watched him whenever they were atRosings, and whenever he came to Hunsford; but without much success. Hecertainly looked at her friend a great deal, but the expression of thatlook was disputable. It was an earnest, steadfast gaze, but she oftendoubted whether there were much admiration in it, and sometimes itseemed nothing but absence of mind.She had once or twice suggested to Elizabeth the possibility of hisbeing partial to her, but Elizabeth always laughed at the idea; and Mrs.Collins did not think it right to press the subject, from the danger ofraising expectations which might only end in disappointment; for in heropinion it admitted not of a doubt, that all her friend's dislike wouldvanish, if she could suppose him to be in her power.In her kind schemes for Elizabeth, she sometimes planned her marryingColonel Fitzwilliam. He was beyond comparison the most pleasant man; hecertainly admired her, and his situation in life was most eligible; but,to counterbalance these advantages, Mr. Darcy had considerable patronagein the church, and his cousin could have none at all.Chapter 33More than once did Elizabeth, in her ramble within the park,unexpectedly meet Mr. Darcy. She felt all the perverseness of themischance that should bring him where no one else was brought, and, toprevent its ever happening again, took care to inform him at first thatit was a favourite haunt of hers. How it could occur a second time,therefore, was very odd! Yet it did, and even a third. It seemed likewilful ill-nature, or a voluntary penance, for on these occasions it wasnot merely a few formal inquiries and an awkward pause and then away,but he actually thought it necessary to turn back and walk with her. Henever said a great deal, nor did she give herself the trouble of talkingor of listening much; but it struck her in the course of their thirdrencontre that he was asking some odd unconnected questions--abouther pleasure in being at Hunsford, her love of solitary walks, and heropinion of Mr. and Mrs. Collins's happiness; and that in speaking ofRosings and her not perfectly understanding the house, he seemed toexpect that whenever she came into Kent again she would be staying_there_ too. His words seemed to imply it. Could he have ColonelFitzwilliam in his thoughts? She supposed, if he meant anything, he mustmean an allusion to what might arise in that quarter. It distressedher a little, and she was quite glad to find herself at the gate in thepales opposite the Parsonage.She was engaged one day as she walked, in perusing Jane's last letter,and dwelling on some passages which proved that Jane had not written inspirits, when, instead of being again surprised by Mr. Darcy, she sawon looking up that Colonel Fitzwilliam was meeting her. Putting away theletter immediately and forcing a smile, she said:"I did not know before that you ever walked this way.""I have been making the tour of the park," he replied, "as I generallydo every year, and intend to close it with a call at the Parsonage. Areyou going much farther?""No, I should have turned in a moment."And accordingly she did turn, and they walked towards the Parsonagetogether."Do you certainly leave Kent on Saturday?" said she."Yes--if Darcy does not put it off again. But I am at his disposal. Hearranges the business just as he pleases.""And if not able to please himself in the arrangement, he has at leastpleasure in the great power of choice. I do not know anybody who seemsmore to enjoy the power of doing what he likes than Mr. Darcy.""He likes to have his own way very well," replied Colonel Fitzwilliam."But so we all do. It is only that he has better means of having itthan many others, because he is rich, and many others are poor. I speakfeelingly. A younger son, you know, must be inured to self-denial anddependence.""In my opinion, the younger son of an earl can know very little ofeither. Now seriously, what have you ever known of self-denial anddependence? When have you been prevented by want of money from goingwherever you chose, or procuring anything you had a fancy for?""These are home questions--and perhaps I cannot say that I haveexperienced many hardships of that nature. But in matters of greaterweight, I may suffer from want of money. Younger sons cannot marry wherethey like.""Unless where they like women of fortune, which I think they very oftendo.""Our habits of expense make us too dependent, and there are not manyin my rank of life who can afford to marry without some attention tomoney.""Is this," thought Elizabeth, "meant for me?" and she coloured at theidea; but, recovering herself, said in a lively tone, "And pray, whatis the usual price of an earl's younger son? Unless the elder brother isvery sickly, I suppose you would not ask above fifty thousand pounds."He answered her in the same style, and the subject dropped. To interrupta silence which might make him fancy her affected with what had passed,she soon afterwards said:"I imagine your cousin brought you down with him chiefly for the sake ofhaving someone at his disposal. I wonder he does not marry, to secure alasting convenience of that kind. But, perhaps, his sister does as wellfor the present, and, as she is under his sole care, he may do what helikes with her.""No," said Colonel Fitzwilliam, "that is an advantage which he mustdivide with me. I am joined with him in the guardianship of Miss Darcy.""Are you indeed? And pray what sort of guardians do you make? Does yourcharge give you much trouble? Young ladies of her age are sometimes alittle difficult to manage, and if she has the true Darcy spirit, shemay like to have her own way."As she spoke she observed him looking at her earnestly; and the mannerin which he immediately asked her why she supposed Miss Darcy likely togive them any uneasiness, convinced her that she had somehow or othergot pretty near the truth. She directly replied:"You need not be frightened. I never heard any harm of her; and I daresay she is one of the most tractable creatures in the world. She is avery great favourite with some ladies of my acquaintance, Mrs. Hurst andMiss Bingley. I think I have heard you say that you know them.""I know them a little. Their brother is a pleasant gentlemanlike man--heis a great friend of Darcy's.""Oh! yes," said Elizabeth drily; "Mr. Darcy is uncommonly kind to Mr.Bingley, and takes a prodigious deal of care of him.""Care of him! Yes, I really believe Darcy _does_ take care of him inthose points where he most wants care. From something that he told me inour journey hither, I have reason to think Bingley very much indebted tohim. But I ought to beg his pardon, for I have no right to suppose thatBingley was the person meant. It was all conjecture.""What is it you mean?""It is a circumstance which Darcy could not wish to be generally known,because if it were to get round to the lady's family, it would be anunpleasant thing.""You may depend upon my not mentioning it.""And remember that I have not much reason for supposing it to beBingley. What he told me was merely this: that he congratulated himselfon having lately saved a friend from the inconveniences of a mostimprudent marriage, but without mentioning names or any otherparticulars, and I only suspected it to be Bingley from believinghim the kind of young man to get into a scrape of that sort, and fromknowing them to have been together the whole of last summer.""Did Mr. Darcy give you reasons for this interference?""I understood that there were some very strong objections against thelady.""And what arts did he use to separate them?""He did not talk to me of his own arts," said Fitzwilliam, smiling. "Heonly told me what I have now told you."Elizabeth made no answer, and walked on, her heart swelling withindignation. After watching her a little, Fitzwilliam asked her why shewas so thoughtful."I am thinking of what you have been telling me," said she. "Yourcousin's conduct does not suit my feelings. Why was he to be the judge?""You are rather disposed to call his interference officious?""I do not see what right Mr. Darcy had to decide on the propriety of hisfriend's inclination, or why, upon his own judgement alone, he was todetermine and direct in what manner his friend was to be happy.But," she continued, recollecting herself, "as we know none of theparticulars, it is not fair to condemn him. It is not to be supposedthat there was much affection in the case.""That is not an unnatural surmise," said Fitzwilliam, "but it is alessening of the honour of my cousin's triumph very sadly."This was spoken jestingly; but it appeared to her so just a pictureof Mr. Darcy, that she would not trust herself with an answer, andtherefore, abruptly changing the conversation talked on indifferentmatters until they reached the Parsonage. There, shut into her own room,as soon as their visitor left them, she could think without interruptionof all that she had heard. It was not to be supposed that any otherpeople could be meant than those with whom she was connected. Therecould not exist in the world _two_ men over whom Mr. Darcy could havesuch boundless influence. That he had been concerned in the measurestaken to separate Bingley and Jane she had never doubted; but she hadalways attributed to Miss Bingley the principal design and arrangementof them. If his own vanity, however, did not mislead him, _he_ wasthe cause, his pride and caprice were the cause, of all that Jane hadsuffered, and still continued to suffer. He had ruined for a whileevery hope of happiness for the most affectionate, generous heart in theworld; and no one could say how lasting an evil he might have inflicted."There were some very strong objections against the lady," were ColonelFitzwilliam's words; and those strong objections probably were, herhaving one uncle who was a country attorney, and another who was inbusiness in London."To Jane herself," she exclaimed, "there could be no possibility ofobjection; all loveliness and goodness as she is!--her understandingexcellent, her mind improved, and her manners captivating. Neithercould anything be urged against my father, who, though with somepeculiarities, has abilities Mr. Darcy himself need not disdain, andrespectability which he will probably never reach." When she thought ofher mother, her confidence gave way a little; but she would not allowthat any objections _there_ had material weight with Mr. Darcy, whosepride, she was convinced, would receive a deeper wound from the want ofimportance in his friend's connections, than from their want of sense;and she was quite decided, at last, that he had been partly governedby this worst kind of pride, and partly by the wish of retaining Mr.Bingley for his sister.The agitation and tears which the subject occasioned, brought on aheadache; and it grew so much worse towards the evening, that, added toher unwillingness to see Mr. Darcy, it determined her not to attend hercousins to Rosings, where they were engaged to drink tea. Mrs. Collins,seeing that she was really unwell, did not press her to go and as muchas possible prevented her husband from pressing her; but Mr. Collinscould not conceal his apprehension of Lady Catherine's being ratherdispleased by her staying at home.Chapter 34When they were gone, Elizabeth, as if intending to exasperate herselfas much as possible against Mr. Darcy, chose for her employment theexamination of all the letters which Jane had written to her since herbeing in Kent. They contained no actual complaint, nor was there anyrevival of past occurrences, or any communication of present suffering.But in all, and in almost every line of each, there was a want of thatcheerfulness which had been used to characterise her style, and which,proceeding from the serenity of a mind at ease with itself and kindlydisposed towards everyone, had been scarcely ever clouded. Elizabethnoticed every sentence conveying the idea of uneasiness, with anattention which it had hardly received on the first perusal. Mr. Darcy'sshameful boast of what misery he had been able to inflict, gave hera keener sense of her sister's sufferings. It was some consolationto think that his visit to Rosings was to end on the day after thenext--and, a still greater, that in less than a fortnight she shouldherself be with Jane again, and enabled to contribute to the recovery ofher spirits, by all that affection could do.She could not think of Darcy's leaving Kent without remembering thathis cousin was to go with him; but Colonel Fitzwilliam had made it clearthat he had no intentions at all, and agreeable as he was, she did notmean to be unhappy about him.While settling this point, she was suddenly roused by the sound of thedoor-bell, and her spirits were a little fluttered by the idea of itsbeing Colonel Fitzwilliam himself, who had once before called late inthe evening, and might now come to inquire particularly after her.But this idea was soon banished, and her spirits were very differentlyaffected, when, to her utter amazement, she saw Mr. Darcy walk into theroom. In an hurried manner he immediately began an inquiry after herhealth, imputing his visit to a wish of hearing that she were better.She answered him with cold civility. He sat down for a few moments, andthen getting up, walked about the room. Elizabeth was surprised, butsaid not a word. After a silence of several minutes, he came towards herin an agitated manner, and thus began:"In vain I have struggled. It will not do. My feelings will not berepressed. You must allow me to tell you how ardently I admire and loveyou."Elizabeth's astonishment was beyond expression. She stared, coloured,doubted, and was silent. This he considered sufficient encouragement;and the avowal of all that he felt, and had long felt for her,immediately followed. He spoke well; but there were feelings besidesthose of the heart to be detailed; and he was not more eloquent on thesubject of tenderness than of pride. His sense of her inferiority--ofits being a degradation--of the family obstacles which had alwaysopposed to inclination, were dwelt on with a warmth which seemed due tothe consequence he was wounding, but was very unlikely to recommend hissuit.In spite of her deeply-rooted dislike, she could not be insensible tothe compliment of such a man's affection, and though her intentions didnot vary for an instant, she was at first sorry for the pain he was toreceive; till, roused to resentment by his subsequent language, shelost all compassion in anger. She tried, however, to compose herself toanswer him with patience, when he should have done. He concluded withrepresenting to her the strength of that attachment which, in spiteof all his endeavours, he had found impossible to conquer; and withexpressing his hope that it would now be rewarded by her acceptance ofhis hand. As he said this, she could easily see that he had no doubtof a favourable answer. He _spoke_ of apprehension and anxiety, buthis countenance expressed real security. Such a circumstance couldonly exasperate farther, and, when he ceased, the colour rose into hercheeks, and she said:"In such cases as this, it is, I believe, the established mode toexpress a sense of obligation for the sentiments avowed, howeverunequally they may be returned. It is natural that obligation shouldbe felt, and if I could _feel_ gratitude, I would now thank you. But Icannot--I have never desired your good opinion, and you have certainlybestowed it most unwillingly. I am sorry to have occasioned pain toanyone. It has been most unconsciously done, however, and I hope will beof short duration. The feelings which, you tell me, have long preventedthe acknowledgment of your regard, can have little difficulty inovercoming it after this explanation."Mr. Darcy, who was leaning against the mantelpiece with his eyes fixedon her face, seemed to catch her words with no less resentment thansurprise. His complexion became pale with anger, and the disturbanceof his mind was visible in every feature. He was struggling for theappearance of composure, and would not open his lips till he believedhimself to have attained it. The pause was to Elizabeth's feelingsdreadful. At length, with a voice of forced calmness, he said:"And this is all the reply which I am to have the honour of expecting!I might, perhaps, wish to be informed why, with so little _endeavour_ atcivility, I am thus rejected. But it is of small importance.""I might as well inquire," replied she, "why with so evident a desireof offending and insulting me, you chose to tell me that you liked meagainst your will, against your reason, and even against your character?Was not this some excuse for incivility, if I _was_ uncivil? But I haveother provocations. You know I have. Had not my feelings decided againstyou--had they been indifferent, or had they even been favourable, do youthink that any consideration would tempt me to accept the man who hasbeen the means of ruining, perhaps for ever, the happiness of a mostbeloved sister?"As she pronounced these words, Mr. Darcy changed colour; but the emotionwas short, and he listened without attempting to interrupt her while shecontinued:"I have every reason in the world to think ill of you. No motive canexcuse the unjust and ungenerous part you acted _there_. You dare not,you cannot deny, that you have been the principal, if not the only meansof dividing them from each other--of exposing one to the censure of theworld for caprice and instability, and the other to its derision fordisappointed hopes, and involving them both in misery of the acutestkind."She paused, and saw with no slight indignation that he was listeningwith an air which proved him wholly unmoved by any feeling of remorse.He even looked at her with a smile of affected incredulity."Can you deny that you have done it?" she repeated.With assumed tranquillity he then replied: "I have no wish of denyingthat I did everything in my power to separate my friend from yoursister, or that I rejoice in my success. Towards _him_ I have beenkinder than towards myself."Elizabeth disdained the appearance of noticing this civil reflection,but its meaning did not escape, nor was it likely to conciliate her."But it is not merely this affair," she continued, "on which my dislikeis founded. Long before it had taken place my opinion of you wasdecided. Your character was unfolded in the recital which I receivedmany months ago from Mr. Wickham. On this subject, what can you have tosay? In what imaginary act of friendship can you here defend yourself?or under what misrepresentation can you here impose upon others?""You take an eager interest in that gentleman's concerns," said Darcy,in a less tranquil tone, and with a heightened colour."Who that knows what his misfortunes have been, can help feeling aninterest in him?""His misfortunes!" repeated Darcy contemptuously; "yes, his misfortuneshave been great indeed.""And of your infliction," cried Elizabeth with energy. "You have reducedhim to his present state of poverty--comparative poverty. You havewithheld the advantages which you must know to have been designed forhim. You have deprived the best years of his life of that independencewhich was no less his due than his desert. You have done all this!and yet you can treat the mention of his misfortune with contempt andridicule.""And this," cried Darcy, as he walked with quick steps across the room,"is your opinion of me! This is the estimation in which you hold me!I thank you for explaining it so fully. My faults, according to thiscalculation, are heavy indeed! But perhaps," added he, stopping inhis walk, and turning towards her, "these offenses might have beenoverlooked, had not your pride been hurt by my honest confession of thescruples that had long prevented my forming any serious design. Thesebitter accusations might have been suppressed, had I, with greaterpolicy, concealed my struggles, and flattered you into the belief ofmy being impelled by unqualified, unalloyed inclination; by reason, byreflection, by everything. But disguise of every sort is my abhorrence.Nor am I ashamed of the feelings I related. They were natural andjust. Could you expect me to rejoice in the inferiority of yourconnections?--to congratulate myself on the hope of relations, whosecondition in life is so decidedly beneath my own?"Elizabeth felt herself growing more angry every moment; yet she tried tothe utmost to speak with composure when she said:"You are mistaken, Mr. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of yourdeclaration affected me in any other way, than as it spared me the concernwhich I might have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a moregentlemanlike manner."She saw him start at this, but he said nothing, and she continued:"You could not have made the offer of your hand in any possible way thatwould have tempted me to accept it."Again his astonishment was obvious; and he looked at her with anexpression of mingled incredulity and mortification. She went on:"From the very beginning--from the first moment, I may almost say--ofmy acquaintance with you, your manners, impressing me with the fullestbelief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain ofthe feelings of others, were such as to form the groundwork ofdisapprobation on which succeeding events have built so immovable adislike; and I had not known you a month before I felt that you were thelast man in the world whom I could ever be prevailed on to marry.""You have said quite enough, madam. I perfectly comprehend yourfeelings, and have now only to be ashamed of what my own have been.Forgive me for having taken up so much of your time, and accept my bestwishes for your health and happiness."And with these words he hastily left the room, and Elizabeth heard himthe next moment open the front door and quit the house.The tumult of her mind, was now painfully great. She knew not howto support herself, and from actual weakness sat down and cried forhalf-an-hour. Her astonishment, as she reflected on what had passed,was increased by every review of it. That she should receive an offer ofmarriage from Mr. Darcy! That he should have been in love with her forso many months! So much in love as to wish to marry her in spite ofall the objections which had made him prevent his friend's marryingher sister, and which must appear at least with equal force in hisown case--was almost incredible! It was gratifying to have inspiredunconsciously so strong an affection. But his pride, his abominablepride--his shameless avowal of what he had done with respect toJane--his unpardonable assurance in acknowledging, though he couldnot justify it, and the unfeeling manner in which he had mentioned Mr.Wickham, his cruelty towards whom he had not attempted to deny, soonovercame the pity which the consideration of his attachment had fora moment excited. She continued in very agitated reflections till thesound of Lady Catherine's carriage made her feel how unequal she was toencounter Charlotte's observation, and hurried her away to her room.Chapter 35Elizabeth awoke the next morning to the same thoughts and meditationswhich had at length closed her eyes. She could not yet recover from thesurprise of what had happened; it was impossible to think of anythingelse; and, totally indisposed for employment, she resolved, soon afterbreakfast, to indulge herself in air and exercise. She was proceedingdirectly to her favourite walk, when the recollection of Mr. Darcy'ssometimes coming there stopped her, and instead of entering the park,she turned up the lane, which led farther from the turnpike-road. Thepark paling was still the boundary on one side, and she soon passed oneof the gates into the ground.After walking two or three times along that part of the lane, she wastempted, by the pleasantness of the morning, to stop at the gates andlook into the park. The five weeks which she had now passed in Kent hadmade a great difference in the country, and every day was adding to theverdure of the early trees. She was on the point of continuing her walk,when she caught a glimpse of a gentleman within the sort of grove whichedged the park; he was moving that way; and, fearful of its being Mr.Darcy, she was directly retreating. But the person who advanced was nownear enough to see her, and stepping forward with eagerness, pronounced.
