However little known the feelings or views of such a man may be on hisfirst entering a neighbourhood, this truth is so well fixed in the mindsof the surrounding families, that he is considered the rightful propertyof some one or other of their daughters."My dear Mr. Bennet," said his lady to him one day, "have you heard thatNetherfield Park is let at last?"Mr. Bennet replied that he had not."But it is," returned she; "for Mrs. Long has just been here, and shetold me all about it."Mr. Bennet made no answer."Do you not want to know who has taken it?" cried his wife impatiently."_You_ want to tell me, and I have no objection to hearing it."This was invitation enough."Why, my dear, you must know, Mrs. Long says that Netherfield is takenby a young man of large fortune from the north of England; that he camedown on Monday in a chaise and four to see the place, and was so muchdelighted with it, that he agreed with Mr. Morris immediately; that heis to take possession before Michaelmas, and some of his servants are tobe in the house by the end of next week.""What is his name?""Bingley.""Is he married or single?""Oh! Single, my dear, to be sure! A single man of large fortune; four orfive thousand a year. What a fine thing for our girls!""How so? How can it affect them?""My dear Mr. Bennet," replied his wife, "how can you be so tiresome! Youmust know that I am thinking of his marrying one of them.""Is that his design in settling here?""Design! Nonsense, how can you talk so! But it is very likely that he_may_ fall in love with one of them, and therefore you must visit him assoon as he comes.""I see no occasion for that. You and the girls may go, or you may sendthem by themselves, which perhaps will be still better, for as you areas handsome as any of them, Mr. Bingley may like you the best of theparty.""My dear, you flatter me. I certainly _have_ had my share of beauty, butI do not pretend to be anything extraordinary now. When a woman has fivegrown-up daughters, she ought to give over thinking of her own beauty.""In such cases, a woman has not often much beauty to think of.""But, my dear, you must indeed go and see Mr. Bingley when he comes intothe neighbourhood.""It is more than I engage for, I assure you.""But consider your daughters. Only think what an establishment it wouldbe for one of them. Sir William and Lady Lucas are determined togo, merely on that account, for in general, you know, they visit nonewcomers. Indeed you must go, for it will be impossible for _us_ tovisit him if you do not.""You are over-scrupulous, surely. I dare say Mr. Bingley will be veryglad to see you; and I will send a few lines by you to assure him of myhearty consent to his marrying whichever he chooses of the girls; thoughI must throw in a good word for my little Lizzy.""I desire you will do no such thing. Lizzy is not a bit better than theothers; and I am sure she is not half so handsome as Jane, nor half sogood-humoured as Lydia. But you are always giving _her_ the preference.""They have none of them much to recommend them," replied he; "they areall silly and ignorant like other girls; but Lizzy has something more ofquickness than her sisters.""Mr. Bennet, how _can_ you abuse your own children in such a way? Youtake delight in vexing me. You have no compassion for my poor nerves.""You mistake me, my dear. I have a high respect for your nerves. Theyare my old friends. I have heard you mention them with considerationthese last twenty years at least.""Ah, you do not know what I suffer.""But I hope you will get over it, and live to see many young men of fourthousand a year come into the neighbourhood.""It will be no use to us, if twenty such should come, since you will notvisit them.""Depend upon it, my dear, that when there are twenty, I will visit themall."Mr. Bennet was so odd a mixture of quick parts, sarcastic humour,reserve, and caprice, that the experience of three-and-twenty years hadbeen insufficient to make his wife understand his character. _Her_ mindwas less difficult to develop. She was a woman of mean understanding,little information, and uncertain temper. When she was discontented,she fancied herself nervous. The business of her life was to get herdaughters married; its solace was visiting and news.Chapter 2Mr. Bennet was among the earliest of those who waited on Mr. Bingley. Hehad always intended to visit him, though to the last always assuringhis wife that he should not go; and till the evening after the visit waspaid she had no knowledge of it. It was then disclosed in the followingmanner. Observing his second daughter employed in trimming a hat, hesuddenly addressed her with:"I hope Mr. Bingley will like it, Lizzy.""We are not in a way to know _what_ Mr. Bingley likes," said her motherresentfully, "since we are not to visit.""But you forget, mamma," said Elizabeth, "that we shall meet him at theassemblies, and that Mrs. Long promised to introduce him.""I do not believe Mrs. Long will do any such thing. She has two niecesof her own. She is a selfish, hypocritical woman, and I have no opinionof her.""No more have I," said Mr. Bennet; "and I am glad to find that you donot depend on her serving you."Mrs. Bennet deigned not to make any reply, but, unable to containherself, began scolding one of her daughters."Don't keep coughing so, Kitty, for Heaven's sake! Have a littlecompassion on my nerves. You tear them to pieces.""Kitty has no discretion in her coughs," said her father; "she timesthem ill.""I do not cough for my own amusement," replied Kitty fretfully. "When isyour next ball to be, Lizzy?""To-morrow fortnight.""Aye, so it is," cried her mother, "and Mrs. Long does not come backtill the day before; so it will be impossible for her to introduce him,for she will not know him herself.""Then, my dear, you may have the advantage of your friend, and introduceMr. Bingley to _her_.""Impossible, Mr. Bennet, impossible, when I am not acquainted with himmyself; how can you be so teasing?""I honour your circumspection. A fortnight's acquaintance is certainlyvery little. One cannot know what a man really is by the end of afortnight. But if _we_ do not venture somebody else will; and after all,Mrs. Long and her neices must stand their chance; and, therefore, asshe will think it an act of kindness, if you decline the office, I willtake it on myself."The girls stared at their father. Mrs. Bennet said only, "Nonsense,nonsense!""What can be the meaning of that emphatic exclamation?" cried he. "Doyou consider the forms of introduction, and the stress that is laid onthem, as nonsense? I cannot quite agree with you _there_. What say you,Mary? For you are a young lady of deep reflection, I know, and readgreat books and make extracts."Mary wished to say something sensible, but knew not how."While Mary is adjusting her ideas," he continued, "let us return to Mr.Bingley.""I am sick of Mr. Bingley," cried his wife."I am sorry to hear _that_; but why did not you tell me that before? IfI had known as much this morning I certainly would not have calledon him. It is very unlucky; but as I have actually paid the visit, wecannot escape the acquaintance now."The astonishment of the ladies was just what he wished; that of Mrs.Bennet perhaps surpassing the rest; though, when the first tumult of joywas over, she began to declare that it was what she had expected all thewhile."How good it was in you, my dear Mr. Bennet! But I knew I shouldpersuade you at last. I was sure you loved your girls too well toneglect such an acquaintance. Well, how pleased I am! and it is such agood joke, too, that you should have gone this morning and never said aword about it till now.""Now, Kitty, you may cough as much as you choose," said Mr. Bennet; and,as he spoke, he left the room, fatigued with the raptures of his wife."What an excellent father you have, girls!" said she, when the door wasshut. "I do not know how you will ever make him amends for his kindness;or me, either, for that matter. At our time of life it is not sopleasant, I can tell you, to be making new acquaintances every day; butfor your sakes, we would do anything. Lydia, my love, though you _are_the youngest, I dare say Mr. Bingley will dance with you at the nextball.""Oh!" said Lydia stoutly, "I am not afraid; for though I _am_ theyoungest, I'm the tallest."The rest of the evening was spent in conjecturing how soon he wouldreturn Mr. Bennet's visit, and determining when they should ask him todinner.Chapter 3Not all that Mrs. Bennet, however, with the assistance of her fivedaughters, could ask on the subject, was sufficient to draw from herhusband any satisfactory description of Mr. Bingley. They attacked himin various ways--with barefaced questions, ingenious suppositions, anddistant surmises; but he eluded the skill of them all, and they were atlast obliged to accept the second-hand intelligence of their neighbour,Lady Lucas. Her report was highly favourable. Sir William had beendelighted with him. He was quite young, wonderfully handsome, extremelyagreeable, and, to crown the whole, he meant to be at the next assemblywith a large party. Nothing could be more delightful! To be fond ofdancing was a certain step towards falling in love; and very livelyhopes of Mr. Bingley's heart were entertained."If I can but see one of my daughters happily settled at Netherfield,"said Mrs. Bennet to her husband, "and all the others equally wellmarried, I shall have nothing to wish for."In a few days Mr. Bingley returned Mr. Bennet's visit, and sat aboutten minutes with him in his library. He had entertained hopes of beingadmitted to a sight of the young ladies, of whose beauty he hadheard much; but he saw only the father. The ladies were somewhat morefortunate, for they had the advantage of ascertaining from an upperwindow that he wore a blue coat, and rode a black horse.An invitation to dinner was soon afterwards dispatched; and alreadyhad Mrs. Bennet planned the courses that were to do credit to herhousekeeping, when an answer arrived which deferred it all. Mr. Bingleywas obliged to be in town the following day, and, consequently, unableto accept the honour of their invitation, etc. Mrs. Bennet was quitedisconcerted. She could not imagine what business he could have in townso soon after his arrival in Hertfordshire; and she began to fear thathe might be always flying about from one place to another, and neversettled at Netherfield as he ought to be. Lady Lucas quieted her fearsa little by starting the idea of his being gone to London only to geta large party for the ball; and a report soon followed that Mr. Bingleywas to bring twelve ladies and seven gentlemen with him to the assembly.The girls grieved over such a number of ladies, but were comforted theday before the ball by hearing, that instead of twelve he brought onlysix with him from London--his five sisters and a cousin. And whenthe party entered the assembly room it consisted of only fivealtogether--Mr. Bingley, his two sisters, the husband of the eldest, andanother young man.Mr. Bingley was good-looking and gentlemanlike; he had a pleasantcountenance, and easy, unaffected manners. His sisters were fine women,with an air of decided fashion. His brother-in-law, Mr. Hurst, merelylooked the gentleman; but his friend Mr. Darcy soon drew the attentionof the room by his fine, tall person, handsome features, noble mien, andthe report which was in general circulation within five minutesafter his entrance, of his having ten thousand a year. The gentlemenpronounced him to be a fine figure of a man, the ladies declared hewas much handsomer than Mr. Bingley, and he was looked at with greatadmiration for about half the evening, till his manners gave a disgustwhich turned the tide of his popularity; for he was discovered to beproud; to be above his company, and above being pleased; and not allhis large estate in Derbyshire could then save him from having a mostforbidding, disagreeable countenance, and being unworthy to be comparedwith his friend.Mr. Bingley had soon made himself acquainted with all the principalpeople in the room; he was lively and unreserved, danced every dance,was angry that the ball closed so early, and talked of givingone himself at Netherfield. Such amiable qualities must speak forthemselves. What a contrast between him and his friend! Mr. Darcy dancedonly once with Mrs. Hurst and once with Miss Bingley, declined beingintroduced to any other lady, and spent the rest of the evening inwalking about the room, speaking occasionally to one of his own party.His character was decided. He was the proudest, most disagreeable manin the world, and everybody hoped that he would never come there again.Amongst the most violent against him was Mrs. Bennet, whose dislike ofhis general behaviour was sharpened into particular resentment by hishaving slighted one of her daughters.Elizabeth Bennet had been obliged, by the scarcity of gentlemen, to sitdown for two dances; and during part of that time, Mr. Darcy had beenstanding near enough for her to hear a conversation between him and Mr.Bingley, who came from the dance for a few minutes, to press his friendto join it."Come, Darcy," said he, "I must have you dance. I hate to see youstanding about by yourself in this stupid manner. You had much betterdance.""I certainly shall not. You know how I detest it, unless I amparticularly acquainted with my partner. At such an assembly as thisit would be insupportable. Your sisters are engaged, and there is notanother woman in the room whom it would not be a punishment to me tostand up with.""I would not be so fastidious as you are," cried Mr. Bingley, "for akingdom! Upon my honour, I never met with so many pleasant girls inmy life as I have this evening; and there are several of them you seeuncommonly pretty.""_You_ are dancing with the only handsome girl in the room," said Mr.Darcy, looking at the eldest Miss Bennet."Oh! She is the most beautiful creature I ever beheld! But there is oneof her sisters sitting down just behind you, who is very pretty, and Idare say very agreeable. Do let me ask my partner to introduce you.""Which do you mean?" and turning round he looked for a moment atElizabeth, till catching her eye, he withdrew his own and coldly said:"She is tolerable, but not handsome enough to tempt _me_; I am in nohumour at present to give consequence to young ladies who are slightedby other men. You had better return to your partner and enjoy hersmiles, for you are wasting your time with me."Mr. Bingley followed his advice. Mr. Darcy walked off; and Elizabethremained with no very cordial feelings toward him. She told the story,however, with great spirit among her friends; for she had a lively,playful disposition, which delighted in anything ridiculous.The evening altogether passed off pleasantly to the whole family. Mrs.Bennet had seen her eldest daughter much admired by the Netherfieldparty. Mr. Bingley had danced with her twice, and she had beendistinguished by his sisters. Jane was as much gratified by this asher mother could be, though in a quieter way. Elizabeth felt Jane'spleasure. Mary had heard herself mentioned to Miss Bingley as the mostaccomplished girl in the neighbourhood; and Catherine and Lydia had beenfortunate enough never to be without partners, which was all that theyhad yet learnt to care for at a ball. They returned, therefore, in goodspirits to Longbourn, the village where they lived, and of which theywere the principal inhabitants. They found Mr. Bennet still up. Witha book he was regardless of time; and on the present occasion he had agood deal of curiosity as to the event of an evening which had raisedsuch splendid expectations. He had rather hoped that his wife's views onthe stranger would be disappointed; but he soon found out that he had adifferent story to hear."Oh! my dear Mr. Bennet," as she entered the room, "we have had a mostdelightful evening, a most excellent ball. I wish you had been there.Jane was so admired, nothing could be like it. Everybody said how wellshe looked; and Mr. Bingley thought her quite beautiful, and danced withher twice! Only think of _that_, my dear; he actually danced with hertwice! and she was the only creature in the room that he asked a secondtime. First of all, he asked Miss Lucas. I was so vexed to see him standup with her! But, however, he did not admire her at all; indeed, nobodycan, you know; and he seemed quite struck with Jane as she was goingdown the dance. So he inquired who she was, and got introduced, andasked her for the two next. Then the two third he danced with Miss King,and the two fourth with Maria Lucas, and the two fifth with Jane again,and the two sixth with Lizzy, and the _Boulanger_--""If he had had any compassion for _me_," cried her husband impatiently,"he would not have danced half so much! For God's sake, say no more ofhis partners. Oh that he had sprained his ankle in the first dance!""Oh! my dear, I am quite delighted with him. He is so excessivelyhandsome! And his sisters are charming women. I never in my life sawanything more elegant than their dresses. I dare say the lace upon Mrs.Hurst's gown--"Here she was interrupted again. Mr. Bennet protested against anydescription of finery. She was therefore obliged to seek another branchof the subject, and related, with much bitterness of spirit and someexaggeration, the shocking rudeness of Mr. Darcy."But I can assure you," she added, "that Lizzy does not lose much by notsuiting _his_ fancy; for he is a most disagreeable, horrid man, not atall worth pleasing. So high and so conceited that there was no enduringhim! He walked here, and he walked there, fancying himself so verygreat! Not handsome enough to dance with! I wish you had been there, mydear, to have given him one of your set-downs. I quite detest the man."Chapter 4When Jane and Elizabeth were alone, the former, who had been cautious inher praise of Mr. Bingley before, expressed to her sister just how verymuch she admired him."He is just what a young man ought to be," said she, "sensible,good-humoured, lively; and I never saw such happy manners!--so muchease, with such perfect good breeding!""He is also handsome," replied Elizabeth, "which a young man oughtlikewise to be, if he possibly can. His character is thereby complete.""I was very much flattered by his asking me to dance a second time. Idid not expect such a compliment.""Did not you? I did for you. But that is one great difference betweenus. Compliments always take _you_ by surprise, and _me_ never. Whatcould be more natural than his asking you again? He could not helpseeing that you were about five times as pretty as every other womanin the room. No thanks to his gallantry for that. Well, he certainly isvery agreeable, and I give you leave to like him. You have liked many astupider person.""Dear Lizzy!""Oh! you are a great deal too apt, you know, to like people in general.You never see a fault in anybody. All the world are good and agreeablein your eyes. I never heard you speak ill of a human being in yourlife.""I would not wish to be hasty in censuring anyone; but I always speakwhat I think.""I know you do; and it is _that_ which makes the wonder. With _your_good sense, to be so honestly blind to the follies and nonsense ofothers! Affectation of candour is common enough--one meets with iteverywhere. But to be candid without ostentation or design--to take thegood of everybody's character and make it still better, and say nothingof the bad--belongs to you alone. And so you like this man's sisters,too, do you? Their manners are not equal to his.""Certainly not--at first. But they are very pleasing women when youconverse with them. Miss Bingley is to live with her brother, and keephis house; and I am much mistaken if we shall not find a very charmingneighbour in her."Elizabeth listened in silence, but was not convinced; their behaviour atthe assembly had not been calculated to please in general; and with morequickness of observation and less pliancy of temper than her sister,and with a judgement too unassailed by any attention to herself, shewas very little disposed to approve them. They were in fact very fineladies; not deficient in good humour when they were pleased, nor in thepower of making themselves agreeable when they chose it, but proud andconceited. They were rather handsome, had been educated in one of thefirst private seminaries in town, had a fortune of twenty thousandpounds, were in the habit of spending more than they ought, and ofassociating with people of rank, and were therefore in every respectentitled to think well of themselves, and meanly of others. They were ofa respectable family in the north of England; a circumstance more deeplyimpressed on their memories than that their brother's fortune and theirown had been acquired by trade.Mr. Bingley inherited property to the amount of nearly a hundredthousand pounds from his father, who had intended to purchase anestate, but did not live to do it. Mr. Bingley intended it likewise, andsometimes made choice of his county; but as he was now provided with agood house and the liberty of a manor, it was doubtful to many of thosewho best knew the easiness of his temper, whether he might not spend theremainder of his days at Netherfield, and leave the next generation topurchase.His sisters were anxious for his having an estate of his own; but,though he was now only established as a tenant, Miss Bingley was by nomeans unwilling to preside at his table--nor was Mrs. Hurst, who hadmarried a man of more fashion than fortune, less disposed to considerhis house as her home when it suited her. Mr. Bingley had not been ofage two years, when he was tempted by an accidental recommendationto look at Netherfield House. He did look at it, and into it forhalf-an-hour--was pleased with the situation and the principalrooms, satisfied with what the owner said in its praise, and took itimmediately.Between him and Darcy there was a very steady friendship, in spite ofgreat opposition of character. Bingley was endeared to Darcy by theeasiness, openness, and ductility of his temper, though no dispositioncould offer a greater contrast to his own, and though with his own henever appeared dissatisfied. On the strength of Darcy's regard, Bingleyhad the firmest reliance, and of his judgement the highest opinion.In understanding, Darcy was the superior. Bingley was by no meansdeficient, but Darcy was clever. He was at the same time haughty,reserved, and fastidious, and his manners, though well-bred, were notinviting. In that respect his friend had greatly the advantage. Bingleywas sure of being liked wherever he appeared, Darcy was continuallygiving offense.The manner in which they spoke of the Meryton assembly was sufficientlycharacteristic. Bingley had never met with more pleasant people orprettier girls in his life; everybody had been most kind and attentiveto him; there had been no formality, no stiffness; he had soon feltacquainted with all the room; and, as to Miss Bennet, he could notconceive an angel more beautiful. Darcy, on the contrary, had seen acollection of people in whom there was little beauty and no fashion, fornone of whom he had felt the smallest interest, and from none receivedeither attention or pleasure. Miss Bennet he acknowledged to be pretty,but she smiled too much.Mrs. Hurst and her sister allowed it to be so--but still they admiredher and liked her, and pronounced her to be a sweet girl, and onewhom they would not object to know more of. Miss Bennet was thereforeestablished as a sweet girl, and their brother felt authorized by suchcommendation to think of her as he chose.Chapter 5Within a short walk of Longbourn lived a family with whom the Bennetswere particularly intimate. Sir William Lucas had been formerly in tradein Meryton, where he had made a tolerable fortune, and risen to thehonour of knighthood by an address to the king during his mayoralty.The distinction had perhaps been felt too strongly. It had given him adisgust to his business, and to his residence in a small market town;and, in quitting them both, he had removed with his family to a houseabout a mile from Meryton, denominated from that period Lucas Lodge,where he could think with pleasure of his own importance, and,unshackled by business, occupy himself solely in being civil to allthe world. For, though elated by his rank, it did not render himsupercilious; on the contrary, he was all attention to everybody. Bynature inoffensive, friendly, and obliging, his presentation at St.James's had made him courteous.Lady Lucas was a very good kind of woman, not too clever to be avaluable neighbour to Mrs. Bennet. They had several children. The eldestof them, a sensible, intelligent young woman, about twenty-seven, wasElizabeth's intimate friend.That the Miss Lucases and the Miss Bennets should meet to talk overa ball was absolutely necessary; and the morning after the assemblybrought the former to Longbourn to hear and to communicate."_You_ began the evening well, Charlotte," said Mrs. Bennet with civilself-command to Miss Lucas. "_You_ were Mr. Bingley's first choice.""Yes; but he seemed to like his second better.""Oh! you mean Jane, I suppose, because he danced with her twice. To besure that _did_ seem as if he admired her--indeed I rather believe he_did_--I heard something about it--but I hardly know what--somethingabout Mr. Robinson.""Perhaps you mean what I overheard between him and Mr. Robinson; did notI mention it to you? Mr. Robinson's asking him how he liked our Merytonassemblies, and whether he did not think there were a great manypretty women in the room, and _which_ he thought the prettiest? and hisanswering immediately to the last question: 'Oh! the eldest Miss Bennet,beyond a doubt; there cannot be two opinions on that point.'""Upon my word! Well, that is very decided indeed--that does seem asif--but, however, it may all come to nothing, you know.""_My_ overhearings were more to the purpose than _yours_, Eliza," saidCharlotte. "Mr. Darcy is not so well worth listening to as his friend,is he?--poor Eliza!--to be only just _tolerable_.""I beg you would not put it into Lizzy's head to be vexed by hisill-treatment, for he is such a disagreeable man, that it would be quitea misfortune to be liked by him. Mrs. Long told me last night that hesat close to her for half-an-hour without once opening his lips.""Are you quite sure, ma'am?--is not there a little mistake?" said Jane."I certainly saw Mr. Darcy speaking to her.""Aye--because she asked him at last how he liked Netherfield, and hecould not help answering her; but she said he seemed quite angry atbeing spoke to.""Miss Bingley told me," said Jane, "that he never speaks much,unless among his intimate acquaintances. With _them_ he is remarkablyagreeable.""I do not believe a word of it, my dear. If he had been so veryagreeable, he would have talked to Mrs. Long. But I can guess how itwas; everybody says that he is eat up with pride, and I dare say he hadheard somehow that Mrs. Long does not keep a carriage, and had come tothe ball in a hack chaise.""I do not mind his not talking to Mrs. Long," said Miss Lucas, "but Iwish he had danced with Eliza.""Another time, Lizzy," said her mother, "I would not dance with _him_,if I were you.""I believe, ma'am, I may safely promise you _never_ to dance with him.""His pride," said Miss Lucas, "does not offend _me_ so much as prideoften does, because there is an excuse for it. One cannot wonder that sovery fine a young man, with family, fortune, everything in his favour,should think highly of himself. If I may so express it, he has a _right_to be proud.""That is very true," replied Elizabeth, "and I could easily forgive_his_ pride, if he had not mortified _mine_.""Pride," observed Mary, who piqued herself upon the solidity of herreflections, "is a very common failing, I believe. By all that I haveever read, I am convinced that it is very common indeed; that humannature is particularly prone to it, and that there are very few of uswho do not cherish a feeling of self-complacency on the score of somequality or other, real or imaginary. Vanity and pride are differentthings, though the words are often used synonymously. A person maybe proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion ofourselves, vanity to what we would have others think of us.""If I were as rich as Mr. Darcy," cried a young Lucas, who came withhis sisters, "I should not care how proud I was. I would keep a pack offoxhounds, and drink a bottle of wine a day.""Then you would drink a great deal more than you ought," said Mrs.Bennet; "and if I were to see you at it, I should take away your bottledirectly."The boy protested that she should not; she continued to declare that shewould, and the argument ended only with the visit.Chapter 6The ladies of Longbourn soon waited on those of Netherfield. The visitwas soon returned in due form. Miss Bennet's pleasing manners grew onthe goodwill of Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley; and though the mother wasfound to be intolerable, and the younger sisters not worth speaking to,a wish of being better acquainted with _them_ was expressed towardsthe two eldest. By Jane, this attention was received with the greatestpleasure, but Elizabeth still saw superciliousness in their treatmentof everybody, hardly excepting even her sister, and could not like them;though their kindness to Jane, such as it was, had a value as arising inall probability from the influence of their brother's admiration. Itwas generally evident whenever they met, that he _did_ admire her andto _her_ it was equally evident that Jane was yielding to the preferencewhich she had begun to entertain for him from the first, and was in away to be very much in love; but she considered with pleasure that itwas not likely to be discovered by the world in general, since Janeunited, with great strength of feeling, a composure of temper and auniform cheerfulness of manner which would guard her from the suspicionsof the impertinent. She mentioned this to her friend Miss Lucas."It may perhaps be pleasant," replied Charlotte, "to be able to imposeon the public in such a case; but it is sometimes a disadvantage to beso very guarded. If a woman conceals her affection with the same skillfrom the object of it, she may lose the opportunity of fixing him; andit will then be but poor consolation to believe the world equally inthe dark. There is so much of gratitude or vanity in almost everyattachment, that it is not safe to leave any to itself. We can all_begin_ freely--a slight preference is natural enough; but there arevery few of us who have heart enough to be really in love withoutencouragement. In nine cases out of ten a women had better show _more_affection than she feels. Bingley likes your sister undoubtedly; but hemay never do more than like her, if she does not help him on.""But she does help him on, as much as her nature will allow. If I canperceive her regard for him, he must be a simpleton, indeed, not todiscover it too.""Remember, Eliza, that he does not know Jane's disposition as you do.""But if a woman is partial to a man, and does not endeavour to concealit, he must find it out.""Perhaps he must, if he sees enough of her. But, though Bingley and Janemeet tolerably often, it is never for many hours together; and, as theyalways see each other in large mixed parties, it is impossible thatevery moment should be employed in conversing together. Jane shouldtherefore make the most of every half-hour in which she can command hisattention. When she is secure of him, there will be more leisure forfalling in love as much as she chooses.""Your plan is a good one," replied Elizabeth, "where nothing is inquestion but the desire of being well married, and if I were determinedto get a rich husband, or any husband, I dare say I should adopt it. Butthese are not Jane's feelings; she is not acting by design. As yet,she cannot even be certain of the degree of her own regard nor of itsreasonableness. She has known him only a fortnight. She danced fourdances with him at Meryton; she saw him one morning at his own house,and has since dined with him in company four times. This is not quiteenough to make her understand his character.""Not as you represent it. Had she merely _dined_ with him, she mightonly have discovered whether he had a good appetite; but you mustremember that four evenings have also been spent together--and fourevenings may do a great deal.""Yes; these four evenings have enabled them to ascertain that theyboth like Vingt-un better than Commerce; but with respect to any otherleading characteristic, I do not imagine that much has been unfolded.""Well," said Charlotte, "I wish Jane success with all my heart; andif she were married to him to-morrow, I should think she had as good achance of happiness as if she were to be studying his character for atwelvemonth. Happiness in marriage is entirely a matter of chance. Ifthe dispositions of the parties are ever so well known to each other orever so similar beforehand, it does not advance their felicity in theleast. They always continue to grow sufficiently unlike afterwards tohave their share of vexation; and it is better to know as little aspossible of the defects of the person with whom you are to pass yourlife.""You make me laugh, Charlotte; but it is not sound. You know it is notsound, and that you would never act in this way yourself."Occupied in observing Mr. Bingley's attentions to her sister, Elizabethwas far from suspecting that she was herself becoming an object of someinterest in the eyes of his friend. Mr. Darcy had at first scarcelyallowed her to be pretty; he had looked at her without admiration at theball; and when they next met, he looked at her only to criticise. But nosooner had he made it clear to himself and his friends that she hardlyhad a good feature in her face, than he began to find it was rendereduncommonly intelligent by the beautiful expression of her dark eyes. Tothis discovery succeeded some others equally mortifying. Though he haddetected with a critical eye more than one failure of perfect symmetryin her form, he was forced to acknowledge her figure to be light andpleasing; and in spite of his asserting that her manners were not thoseof the fashionable world, he was caught by their easy playfulness. Ofthis she was perfectly unaware; to her he was only the man who madehimself agreeable nowhere, and who had not thought her handsome enoughto dance with.He began to wish to know more of her, and as a step towards conversingwith her himself, attended to her conversation with others. His doing sodrew her notice. It was at Sir William Lucas's, where a large party wereassembled."What does Mr. Darcy mean," said she to Charlotte, "by listening to myconversation with Colonel Forster?""That is a question which Mr. Darcy only can answer.""But if he does it any more I shall certainly let him know that I seewhat he is about. He has a very satirical eye, and if I do not begin bybeing impertinent myself, I shall soon grow afraid of him."On his approaching them soon afterwards, though without seeming to haveany intention of speaking, Miss Lucas defied her friend to mention sucha subject to him; which immediately provoking Elizabeth to do it, sheturned to him and said:"Did you not think, Mr. Darcy, that I expressed myself uncommonlywell just now, when I was teasing Colonel Forster to give us a ball atMeryton?""With great energy; but it is always a subject which makes a ladyenergetic.""You are severe on us.""It will be _her_ turn soon to be teased," said Miss Lucas. "I am goingto open the instrument, Eliza, and you know what follows.""You are a very strange creature by way of a friend!--always wanting meto play and sing before anybody and everybody! If my vanity had takena musical turn, you would have been invaluable; but as it is, I wouldreally rather not sit down before those who must be in the habit ofhearing the very best performers." On Miss Lucas's persevering, however,she added, "Very well, if it must be so, it must." And gravely glancingat Mr. Darcy, "There is a fine old saying, which everybody here is ofcourse familiar with: 'Keep your breath to cool your porridge'; and Ishall keep mine to swell my song."Her performance was pleasing, though by no means capital. After a songor two, and before she could reply to the entreaties of several thatshe would sing again, she was eagerly succeeded at the instrument by hersister Mary, who having, in consequence of being the only plain one inthe family, worked hard for knowledge and accomplishments, was alwaysimpatient for display.Mary had neither genius nor taste; and though vanity had given herapplication, it had given her likewise a pedantic air and conceitedmanner, which would have injured a higher degree of excellence than shehad reached. Elizabeth, easy and unaffected, had been listened to withmuch more pleasure, though not playing half so well; and Mary, at theend of a long concerto, was glad to purchase praise and gratitude byScotch and Irish airs, at the request of her younger sisters, who,with some of the Lucases, and two or three officers, joined eagerly indancing at one end of the room.Mr. Darcy stood near them in silent indignation at such a mode ofpassing the evening, to the exclusion of all conversation, and was toomuch engrossed by his thoughts to perceive that Sir William Lucas washis neighbour, till Sir William thus began:"What a charming amusement for young people this is, Mr. Darcy! Thereis nothing like dancing after all. I consider it as one of the firstrefinements of polished society.""Certainly, sir; and it has the advantage also of being in vogue amongstthe less polished societies of the world. Every savage can dance."Sir William only smiled. "Your friend performs delightfully," hecontinued after a pause, on seeing Bingley join the group; "and I doubtnot that you are an adept in the science yourself, Mr. Darcy.""You saw me dance at Meryton, I believe, sir.""Yes, indeed, and received no inconsiderable pleasure from the sight. Doyou often dance at St. James's?""Never, sir.""Do you not think it would be a proper compliment to the place?""It is a compliment which I never pay to any place if I can avoid it.""You have a house in town, I conclude?"Mr. Darcy bowed."I had once had some thought of fixing in town myself--for I am fondof superior society; but I did not feel quite certain that the air ofLondon would agree with Lady Lucas."He paused in hopes of an answer; but his companion was not disposedto make any; and Elizabeth at that instant moving towards them, he wasstruck with the action of doing a very gallant thing, and called out toher:"My dear Miss Eliza, why are you not dancing? Mr. Darcy, you must allowme to present this young lady to you as a very desirable partner. Youcannot refuse to dance, I am sure when so much beauty is before you."And, taking her hand, he would have given it to Mr. Darcy who, thoughextremely surprised, was not unwilling to receive it, when she instantlydrew back, and said with some discomposure to Sir William:"Indeed, sir, I have not the least intention of dancing. I entreat younot to suppose that I moved this way in order to beg for a partner."Mr. Darcy, with grave propriety, requested to be allowed the honour ofher hand, but in vain. Elizabeth was determined; nor did Sir William atall shake her purpose by his attempt at persuasion."You excel so much in the dance, Miss Eliza, that it is cruel to denyme the happiness of seeing you; and though this gentleman dislikes theamusement in general, he can have no objection, I am sure, to oblige usfor one half-hour.""Mr. Darcy is all politeness," said Elizabeth, smiling."He is, indeed; but, considering the inducement, my dear Miss Eliza,we cannot wonder at his complaisance--for who would object to such apartner?"Elizabeth looked archly, and turned away. Her resistance had notinjured her with the gentleman, and he was thinking of her with somecomplacency, when thus accosted by Miss Bingley:"I can guess the subject of your reverie.""I should imagine not.""You are considering how insupportable it would be to pass many eveningsin this manner--in such society; and indeed I am quite of your opinion.I was never more annoyed! The insipidity, and yet the noise--thenothingness, and yet the self-importance of all those people! What wouldI give to hear your strictures on them!""Your conjecture is totally wrong, I assure you. My mind was moreagreeably engaged. I have been meditating on the very great pleasurewhich a pair of fine eyes in the face of a pretty woman can bestow."Miss Bingley immediately fixed her eyes on his face, and desired hewould tell her what lady had the credit of inspiring such reflections.Mr. Darcy replied with great intrepidity:"Miss Elizabeth Bennet.""Miss Elizabeth Bennet!" repeated Miss Bingley. "I am all astonishment.How long has she been such a favourite?--and pray, when am I to wish youjoy?""That is exactly the question which I expected you to ask. A lady'simagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from loveto matrimony, in a moment. I knew you would be wishing me joy.""Nay, if you are serious about it, I shall consider the matter isabsolutely settled. You will be having a charming mother-in-law, indeed;and, of course, she will always be at Pemberley with you."He listened to her with perfect indifference while she chose toentertain herself in this manner; and as his composure convinced herthat all was safe, her wit flowed long.Chapter 7Mr. Bennet's property consisted almost entirely in an estate of twothousand a year, which, unfortunately for his daughters, was entailed,in default of heirs male, on a distant relation; and their mother'sfortune, though ample for her situation in life, could but ill supplythe deficiency of his. Her father had been an attorney in Meryton, andhad left her four thousand pounds.She had a sister married to a Mr. Phillips, who had been a clerk totheir father and succeeded him in the business, and a brother settled inLondon in a respectable line of trade.The village of Longbourn was only one mile from Meryton; a mostconvenient distance for the young ladies, who were usually temptedthither three or four times a week, to pay their duty to their aunt andto a milliner's shop just over the way. The two youngest of the family,Catherine and Lydia, were particularly frequent in these attentions;their minds were more vacant than their sisters', and when nothingbetter offered, a walk to Meryton was necessary to amuse their morninghours and furnish conversation for the evening; and however bare of newsthe country in general might be, they always contrived to learn somefrom their aunt. At present, indeed, they were well supplied both withnews and happiness by the recent arrival of a militia regiment in theneighbourhood; it was to remain the whole winter, and Meryton was theheadquarters.Their visits to Mrs. Phillips were now productive of the mostinteresting intelligence. Every day added something to their knowledgeof the officers' names and connections. Their lodgings were not long asecret, and at length they began to know the officers themselves. Mr.Phillips visited them all, and this opened to his nieces a store offelicity unknown before. They could talk of nothing but officers; andMr. Bingley's large fortune, the mention of which gave animationto their mother, was worthless in their eyes when opposed to theregimentals of an ensign.After listening one morning to their effusions on this subject, Mr.Bennet coolly observed:"From all that I can collect by your manner of talking, you must be twoof the silliest girls in the country. I have suspected it some time, butI am now convinced."Catherine was disconcerted, and made no answer; but Lydia, with perfectindifference, continued to express her admiration of Captain Carter,and her hope of seeing him in the course of the day, as he was going thenext morning to London."I am astonished, my dear," said Mrs. Bennet, "that you should be soready to think your own children silly. If I wished to think slightinglyof anybody's children, it should not be of my own, however.""If my children are silly, I must hope to be always sensible of it.""Yes--but as it happens, they are all of them very clever.""This is the only point, I flatter myself, on which we do not agree. Ihad hoped that our sentiments coincided in every particular, but I mustso far differ from you as to think our two youngest daughters uncommonlyfoolish.""My dear Mr. Bennet, you must not expect such girls to have the sense oftheir father and mother. When they get to our age, I dare say they willnot think about officers any more than we do. I remember the time whenI liked a red coat myself very well--and, indeed, so I do still at myheart; and if a smart young colonel, with five or six thousand a year,should want one of my girls I shall not say nay to him; and I thoughtColonel Forster looked very becoming the other night at Sir William's inhis regimentals.""Mamma," cried Lydia, "my aunt says that Colonel Forster and CaptainCarter do not go so often to Miss Watson's as they did when they firstcame; she sees them now very often standing in Clarke's library."Mrs. Bennet was prevented replying by the entrance of the footman witha note for Miss Bennet; it came from Netherfield, and the servant waitedfor an answer. Mrs. Bennet's eyes sparkled with pleasure, and she waseagerly calling out, while her daughter read,"Well, Jane, who is it from? What is it about? What does he say? Well,Jane, make haste and tell us; make haste, my love.""It is from Miss Bingley," said Jane, and then read it aloud."MY DEAR FRIEND,--"If you are not so compassionate as to dine to-day with Louisa and me,we shall be in danger of hating each other for the rest of our lives,for a whole day's tete-a-tete between two women can never end without aquarrel. Come as soon as you can on receipt of this. My brother and thegentlemen are to dine with the officers.--Yours ever,"CAROLINE BINGLEY""With the officers!" cried Lydia. "I wonder my aunt did not tell us of_that_.""Dining out," said Mrs. Bennet, "that is very unlucky.""Can I have the carriage?" said Jane."No, my dear, you had better go on horseback, because it seems likely torain; and then you must stay all night.""That would be a good scheme," said Elizabeth, "if you were sure thatthey would not offer to send her home.""Oh! but the gentlemen will have Mr. Bingley's chaise to go to Meryton,and the Hursts have no horses to theirs.""I had much rather go in the coach.""But, my dear, your father cannot spare the horses, I am sure. They arewanted in the farm, Mr. Bennet, are they not?""They are wanted in the farm much oftener than I can get them.""But if you have got them to-day," said Elizabeth, "my mother's purposewill be answered."She did at last extort from her father an acknowledgment that the horseswere engaged. Jane was therefore obliged to go on horseback, and hermother attended her to the door with many cheerful prognostics of abad day. Her hopes were answered; Jane had not been gone long beforeit rained hard. Her sisters were uneasy for her, but her mother wasdelighted. The rain continued the whole evening without intermission;Jane certainly could not come back."This was a lucky idea of mine, indeed!" said Mrs. Bennet more thanonce, as if the credit of making it rain were all her own. Till thenext morning, however, she was not aware of all the felicity of hercontrivance. Breakfast was scarcely over when a servant from Netherfieldbrought the following note for Elizabeth:"MY DEAREST LIZZY,--"I find myself very unwell this morning, which, I suppose, is to beimputed to my getting wet through yesterday. My kind friends will nothear of my returning till I am better. They insist also on my seeing Mr.Jones--therefore do not be alarmed if you should hear of his having beento me--and, excepting a sore throat and headache, there is not much thematter with me.--Yours, etc.""Well, my dear," said Mr. Bennet, when Elizabeth had read the notealoud, "if your daughter should have a dangerous fit of illness--if sheshould die, it would be a comfort to know that it was all in pursuit ofMr. Bingley, and under your orders.""Oh! I am not afraid of her dying. People do not die of little triflingcolds. She will be taken good care of. As long as she stays there, it isall very well. I would go and see her if I could have the carriage."Elizabeth, feeling really anxious, was determined to go to her, thoughthe carriage was not to be had; and as she was no horsewoman, walkingwas her only alternative. She declared her resolution."How can you be so silly," cried her mother, "as to think of such athing, in all this dirt! You will not be fit to be seen when you getthere.""I shall be very fit to see Jane--which is all I want.""Is this a hint to me, Lizzy," said her father, "to send for thehorses?""No, indeed, I do not wish to avoid the walk. The distance is nothingwhen one has a motive; only three miles. I shall be back by dinner.""I admire the activity of your benevolence," observed Mary, "but everyimpulse of feeling should be guided by reason; and, in my opinion,exertion should always be in proportion to what is required.""We will go as far as Meryton with you," said Catherine and Lydia.Elizabeth accepted their company, and the three young ladies set offtogether."If we make haste," said Lydia, as they walked along, "perhaps we maysee something of Captain Carter before he goes."In Meryton they parted; the two youngest repaired to the lodgings of oneof the officers' wives, and Elizabeth continued her walk alone, crossingfield after field at a quick pace, jumping over stiles and springingover puddles with impatient activity, and finding herself at lastwithin view of the house, with weary ankles, dirty stockings, and a faceglowing with the warmth of exercise.She was shown into the breakfast-parlour, where all but Jane wereassembled, and where her appearance created a great deal of surprise.That she should have walked three miles so early in the day, in suchdirty weather, and by herself, was almost incredible to Mrs. Hurst andMiss Bingley; and Elizabeth was convinced that they held her in contemptfor it. She was received, however, very politely by them; and in theirbrother's manners there was something better than politeness; therewas good humour and kindness. Mr. Darcy said very little, and Mr.Hurst nothing at all. The former was divided between admiration of thebrilliancy which exercise had given to her complexion, and doubt asto the occasion's justifying her coming so far alone. The latter wasthinking only of his breakfast.Her inquiries after her sister were not very favourably answered. MissBennet had slept ill, and though up, was very feverish, and notwell enough to leave her room. Elizabeth was glad to be taken to herimmediately; and Jane, who had only been withheld by the fear of givingalarm or inconvenience from expressing in her note how much she longedfor such a visit, was delighted at her entrance. She was not equal,however, to much conversation, and when Miss Bingley left themtogether, could attempt little besides expressions of gratitude for theextraordinary kindness she was treated with. Elizabeth silently attendedher.When breakfast was over they were joined by the sisters; and Elizabethbegan to like them herself, when she saw how much affection andsolicitude they showed for Jane. The apothecary came, and havingexamined his patient, said, as might be supposed, that she had caughta violent cold, and that they must endeavour to get the better of it;advised her to return to bed, and promised her some draughts. The advicewas followed readily, for the feverish symptoms increased, and her headached acutely. Elizabeth did not quit her room for a moment; nor werethe other ladies often absent; the gentlemen being out, they had, infact, nothing to do elsewhere.When the clock struck three, Elizabeth felt that she must go, and veryunwillingly said so. Miss Bingley offered her the carriage, and she onlywanted a little pressing to accept it, when Jane testified such concernin parting with her, that Miss Bingley was obliged to convert the offerof the chaise to an invitation to remain at Netherfield for the present.Elizabeth most thankfully consented, and a servant was dispatched toLongbourn to acquaint the family with her stay and bring back a supplyof clothes.Chapter 8At five o'clock the two ladies retired to dress, and at half-past sixElizabeth was summoned to dinner. To the civil inquiries which thenpoured in, and amongst which she had the pleasure of distinguishing themuch superior solicitude of Mr. Bingley's, she could not make a veryfavourable answer. Jane was by no means better. The sisters, on hearingthis, repeated three or four times how much they were grieved, howshocking it was to have a bad cold, and how excessively they dislikedbeing ill themselves; and then thought no more of the matter: and theirindifference towards Jane when not immediately before them restoredElizabeth to the enjoyment of all her former dislike.Their brother, indeed, was the only one of the party whom she couldregard with any complacency. His anxiety for Jane was evident, and hisattentions to herself most pleasing, and they prevented her feelingherself so much an intruder as she believed she was considered by theothers. She had very little notice from any but him. Miss Bingley wasengrossed by Mr. Darcy, her sister scarcely less so; and as for Mr.Hurst, by whom Elizabeth sat, he was an indolent man, who lived only toeat, drink, and play at cards; who, when he found her to prefer a plaindish to a ragout, had nothing to say to her.When dinner was over, she returned directly to Jane, and Miss Bingleybegan abusing her as soon as she was out of the room. Her manners werepronounced to be very bad indeed, a mixture of pride and impertinence;she had no conversation, no style, no beauty. Mrs. Hurst thought thesame, and added:"She has nothing, in short, to recommend her, but being an excellentwalker. I shall never forget her appearance this morning. She reallylooked almost wild.""She did, indeed, Louisa. I could hardly keep my countenance. Verynonsensical to come at all! Why must _she_ be scampering about thecountry, because her sister had a cold? Her hair, so untidy, so blowsy!""Yes, and her petticoat; I hope you saw her petticoat, six inches deepin mud, I am absolutely certain; and the gown which had been let down tohide it not doing its office.""Your picture may be very exact, Louisa," said Bingley; "but this wasall lost upon me. I thought Miss Elizabeth Bennet looked remarkablywell when she came into the room this morning. Her dirty petticoat quiteescaped my notice.""_You_ observed it, Mr. Darcy, I am sure," said Miss Bingley; "and I aminclined to think that you would not wish to see _your_ sister make suchan exhibition.""Certainly not.""To walk three miles, or four miles, or five miles, or whatever it is,above her ankles in dirt, and alone, quite alone! What could she mean byit? It seems to me to show an abominable sort of conceited independence,a most country-town indifference to decorum.""It shows an affection for her sister that is very pleasing," saidBingley."I am afraid, Mr. Darcy," observed Miss Bingley in a half whisper, "thatthis adventure has rather affected your admiration of her fine eyes.""Not at all," he replied; "they were brightened by the exercise." Ashort pause followed this speech, and Mrs. Hurst began again:"I have an excessive regard for Miss Jane Bennet, she is really a verysweet girl, and I wish with all my heart she were well settled. But withsuch a father and mother, and such low connections, I am afraid there isno chance of it.""I think I have heard you say that their uncle is an attorney inMeryton.""Yes; and they have another, who lives somewhere near Cheapside.""That is capital," added her sister, and they both laughed heartily."If they had uncles enough to fill _all_ Cheapside," cried Bingley, "itwould not make them one jot less agreeable.""But it must very materially lessen their chance of marrying men of anyconsideration in the world," replied Darcy.To this speech Bingley made no answer; but his sisters gave it theirhearty assent, and indulged their mirth for some time at the expense oftheir dear friend's vulgar relations.With a renewal of tenderness, however, they returned to her room onleaving the dining-parlour, and sat with her till summoned to coffee.She was still very poorly, and Elizabeth would not quit her at all, tilllate in the evening, when she had the comfort of seeing her sleep, andwhen it seemed to her rather right than pleasant that she should godownstairs herself. On entering the drawing-room she found the wholeparty at loo, and was immediately invited to join them; but suspectingthem to be playing high she declined it, and making her sister theexcuse, said she would amuse herself for the short time she could staybelow, with a book. Mr. Hurst looked at her with astonishment."Do you prefer reading to cards?" said he; "that is rather singular.""Miss Eliza Bennet," said Miss Bingley, "despises cards. She is a greatreader, and has no pleasure in anything else.""I deserve neither such praise nor such censure," cried Elizabeth; "I am_not_ a great reader, and I have pleasure in many things.""In nursing your sister I am sure you have pleasure," said Bingley; "andI hope it will be soon increased by seeing her quite well."Elizabeth thanked him from her heart, and then walked towards thetable where a few books were lying. He immediately offered to fetch herothers--all that his library afforded."And I wish my collection were larger for your benefit and my owncredit; but I am an idle fellow, and though I have not many, I have morethan I ever looked into."Elizabeth assured him that she could suit herself perfectly with thosein the room."I am astonished," said Miss Bingley, "that my father should have leftso small a collection of books. What a delightful library you have atPemberley, Mr. Darcy!""It ought to be good," he replied, "it has been the work of manygenerations.""And then you have added so much to it yourself, you are always buyingbooks.""I cannot comprehend the neglect of a family library in such days asthese.""Neglect! I am sure you neglect nothing that can add to the beauties ofthat noble place. Charles, when you build _your_ house, I wish it may behalf as delightful as Pemberley.""I wish it may.""But I would really advise you to make your purchase in thatneighbourhood, and take Pemberley for a kind of model. There is not afiner county in England than Derbyshire.""With all my heart; I will buy Pemberley itself if Darcy will sell it.""I am talking of possibilities, Charles.""Upon my word, Caroline, I should think it more possible to getPemberley by purchase than by imitation."Elizabeth was so much caught with what passed, as to leave her verylittle attention for her book; and soon laying it wholly aside, she drewnear the card-table, and stationed herself between Mr. Bingley and hiseldest sister, to observe the game."Is Miss Darcy much grown since the spring?" said Miss Bingley; "willshe be as tall as I am?""I think she will. She is now about Miss Elizabeth Bennet's height, orrather taller.""How I long to see her again! I never met with anybody who delighted meso much. Such a countenance, such manners! And so extremely accomplishedfor her age! Her performance on the pianoforte is exquisite.""It is amazing to me," said Bingley, "how young ladies can have patienceto be so very accomplished as they all are.""All young ladies accomplished! My dear Charles, what do you mean?""Yes, all of them, I think. They all paint tables, cover screens, andnet purses. I scarcely know anyone who cannot do all this, and I am sureI never heard a young lady spoken of for the first time, without beinginformed that she was very accomplished.""Your list of the common extent of accomplishments," said Darcy, "hastoo much truth. The word is applied to many a woman who deserves it nootherwise than by netting a purse or covering a screen. But I am veryfar from agreeing with you in your estimation of ladies in general. Icannot boast of knowing more than half-a-dozen, in the whole range of myacquaintance, that are really accomplished.""Nor I, I am sure," said Miss Bingley."Then," observed Elizabeth, "you must comprehend a great deal in youridea of an accomplished woman.""Yes, I do comprehend a great deal in it.""Oh! certainly," cried his faithful assistant, "no one can be reallyesteemed accomplished who does not greatly surpass what is usually metwith. A woman must have a thorough knowledge of music, singing, drawing,dancing, and the modern languages, to deserve the word; and besidesall this, she must possess a certain something in her air and manner ofwalking, the tone of her voice, her address and expressions, or the wordwill be but half-deserved.""All this she must possess," added Darcy, "and to all this she mustyet add something more substantial, in the improvement of her mind byextensive reading.""I am no longer surprised at your knowing _only_ six accomplished women.I rather wonder now at your knowing _any_.""Are you so severe upon your own sex as to doubt the possibility of allthis?""I never saw such a woman. I never saw such capacity, and taste, andapplication, and elegance, as you describe united."Mrs. Hurst and Miss Bingley both cried out against the injustice of herimplied doubt, and were both protesting that they knew many women whoanswered this description, when Mr. Hurst called them to order, withbitter complaints of their inattention to what was going forward. As allconversation was thereby at an end, Elizabeth soon afterwards left theroom."Elizabeth Bennet," said Miss Bingley, when the door was closed on her,"is one of those young ladies who seek to recommend themselves to theother sex by undervaluing their own; and with many men, I dare say, itsucceeds. But, in my opinion, it is a paltry device, a very mean art.""Undoubtedly," replied Darcy, to whom this remark was chiefly addressed,"there is a meanness in _all_ the arts which ladies sometimes condescendto employ for captivation. Whatever bears affinity to cunning isdespicable."Miss Bingley was not so entirely satisfied with this reply as tocontinue the subject.Elizabeth joined them again only to say that her sister was worse, andthat she could not leave her. Bingley urged Mr. Jones being sent forimmediately; while his sisters, convinced that no country advice couldbe of any service, recommended an express to town for one of the mosteminent physicians. This she would not hear of; but she was not sounwilling to comply with their brother's proposal; and it was settledthat Mr. Jones should be sent for early in the morning, if Miss Bennetwere not decidedly better. Bingley was quite uncomfortable; his sistersdeclared that they were miserable. They solaced their wretchedness,however, by duets after supper, while he could find no better reliefto his feelings than by giving his housekeeper directions that everyattention might be paid to the sick lady and her sister.Chapter 9Elizabeth passed the chief of the night in her sister's room, and in themorning had the pleasure of being able to send a tolerable answer to theinquiries which she very early received from Mr. Bingley by a housemaid,and some time afterwards from the two elegant ladies who waited on hissisters. In spite of this amendment, however, she requested to have anote sent to Longbourn, desiring her mother to visit Jane, and form herown judgement of her situation. The note was immediately dispatched, andits contents as quickly complied with. Mrs. Bennet, accompanied by hertwo youngest girls, reached Netherfield soon after the family breakfast.Had she found Jane in any apparent danger, Mrs. Bennet would have beenvery miserable; but being satisfied on seeing her that her illness wasnot alarming, she had no wish of her recovering immediately, as herrestoration to health would probably remove her from Netherfield. Shewould not listen, therefore, to her daughter's proposal of being carriedhome; neither did the apothecary, who arrived about the same time, thinkit at all advisable. After sitting a little while with Jane, on MissBingley's appearance and invitation, the mother and three daughters allattended her into the breakfast parlour. Bingley met them with hopesthat Mrs. Bennet had not found Miss Bennet worse than she expected."Indeed I have, sir," was her answer. "She is a great deal too ill to bemoved. Mr. Jones says we must not think of moving her. We must trespassa little longer on your kindness.""Removed!" cried Bingley. "It must not be thought of. My sister, I amsure, will not hear of her removal.""You may depend upon it, Madam," said Miss Bingley, with cold civility,"that Miss Bennet will receive every possible attention while sheremains with us."Mrs. Bennet was profuse in her acknowledgments."I am sure," she added, "if it was not for such good friends I do notknow what would become of her, for she is very ill indeed, and suffersa vast deal, though with the greatest patience in the world, which isalways the way with her, for she has, without exception, the sweetesttemper I have ever met with. I often tell my other girls they arenothing to _her_. You have a sweet room here, Mr. Bingley, and acharming prospect over the gravel walk. I do not know a place in thecountry that is equal to Netherfield. You will not think of quitting itin a hurry, I hope, though you have but a short lease.""Whatever I do is done in a hurry," replied he; "and therefore if Ishould resolve to quit Netherfield, I should probably be off in fiveminutes. At present, however, I consider myself as quite fixed here.""That is exactly what I should have supposed of you," said Elizabeth."You begin to comprehend me, do you?" cried he, turning towards her."Oh! yes--I understand you perfectly.""I wish I might take this for a compliment; but to be so easily seenthrough I am afraid is pitiful.""That is as it happens. It does not follow that a deep, intricatecharacter is more or less estimable than such a one as yours.""Lizzy," cried her mother, "remember where you are, and do not run on inthe wild manner that you are suffered to do at home.""I did not know before," continued Bingley immediately, "that you were astudier of character. It must be an amusing study.""Yes, but intricate characters are the _most_ amusing. They have atleast that advantage.""The country," said Darcy, "can in general supply but a few subjects forsuch a study. In a country neighbourhood you move in a very confined andunvarying society.""But people themselves alter so much, that there is something new to beobserved in them for ever.""Yes, indeed," cried Mrs. Bennet, offended by his manner of mentioninga country neighbourhood. "I assure you there is quite as much of _that_going on in the country as in town."Everybody was surprised, and Darcy, after looking at her for a moment,turned silently away. Mrs. Bennet, who fancied she had gained a completevictory over him, continued her triumph."I cannot see that London has any great advantage over the country, formy part, except the shops and public places. The country is a vast dealpleasanter, is it not, Mr. Bingley?""When I am in the country," he replied, "I never wish to leave it;and when I am in town it is pretty much the same. They have each theiradvantages, and I can be equally happy in either.""Aye--that is because you have the right disposition. But thatgentleman," looking at Darcy, "seemed to think the country was nothingat all.""Indeed, Mamma, you are mistaken," said Elizabeth, blushing for hermother. "You quite mistook Mr. Darcy. He only meant that there was notsuch a variety of people to be met with in the country as in the town,which you must acknowledge to be true.""Certainly, my dear, nobody said there were; but as to not meetingwith many people in this neighbourhood, I believe there are fewneighbourhoods larger. I know we dine with four-and-twenty families."Nothing but concern for Elizabeth could enable Bingley to keep hiscountenance. His sister was less delicate, and directed her eyes towardsMr. Darcy with a very expressive smile. Elizabeth, for the sake ofsaying something that might turn her mother's thoughts, now asked her ifCharlotte Lucas had been at Longbourn since _her_ coming away."Yes, she called yesterday with her father. What an agreeable man SirWilliam is, Mr. Bingley, is not he? So much the man of fashion! Sogenteel and easy! He has always something to say to everybody. _That_is my idea of good breeding; and those persons who fancy themselves veryimportant, and never open their mouths, quite mistake the matter.""Did Charlotte dine with you?""No, she would go home. I fancy she was wanted about the mince-pies. Formy part, Mr. Bingley, I always keep servants that can do their own work;_my_ daughters are brought up very differently. But everybody is tojudge for themselves, and the Lucases are a very good sort of girls,I assure you. It is a pity they are not handsome! Not that I thinkCharlotte so _very_ plain--but then she is our particular friend.""She seems a very pleasant young woman.""Oh! dear, yes; but you must own she is very plain. Lady Lucas herselfhas often said so, and envied me Jane's beauty. I do not like to boastof my own child, but to be sure, Jane--one does not often see anybodybetter looking. It is what everybody says. I do not trust my ownpartiality. When she was only fifteen, there was a man at my brotherGardiner's in town so much in love with her that my sister-in-law wassure he would make her an offer before we came away. But, however, hedid not. Perhaps he thought her too young. However, he wrote some verseson her, and very pretty they were.""And so ended his affection," said Elizabeth impatiently. "There hasbeen many a one, I fancy, overcome in the same way. I wonder who firstdiscovered the efficacy of poetry in driving away love!""I have been used to consider poetry as the _food_ of love," said Darcy."Of a fine, stout, healthy love it may. Everything nourishes what isstrong already. But if it be only a slight, thin sort of inclination, Iam convinced that one good sonnet will starve it entirely away."Darcy only smiled; and the general pause which ensued made Elizabethtremble lest her mother should be exposing herself again. She longed tospeak, but could think of nothing to say; and after a short silence Mrs.Bennet began repeating her thanks to Mr. Bingley for his kindness toJane, with an apology for troubling him also with Lizzy. Mr. Bingley wasunaffectedly civil in his answer, and forced his younger sister to becivil also, and say what the occasion required. She performed her partindeed without much graciousness, but Mrs. Bennet was satisfied, andsoon afterwards ordered her carriage. Upon this signal, the youngest ofher daughters put herself forward. The two girls had been whispering toeach other during the whole visit, and the result of it was, that theyoungest should tax Mr. Bingley with having promised on his first cominginto the country to give a ball at Netherfield.Lydia was a stout, well-grown girl of fifteen, with a fine complexionand good-humoured countenance; a favourite with her mother, whoseaffection had brought her into public at an early age. She had highanimal spirits, and a sort of natural self-consequence, which theattention of the officers, to whom her uncle's good dinners, and her owneasy manners recommended her, had increased into assurance. She was veryequal, therefore, to address Mr. Bingley on the subject of the ball, andabruptly reminded him of his promise; adding, that it would be the mostshameful thing in the world if he did not keep it. His answer to thissudden attack was delightful to their mother's ear:"I am perfectly ready, I assure you, to keep my engagement; and whenyour sister is recovered, you shall, if you please, name the very day ofthe ball. But you would not wish to be dancing when she is ill."Lydia declared herself satisfied. "Oh! yes--it would be much better towait till Jane was well, and by that time most likely Captain Carterwould be at Meryton again. And when you have given _your_ ball," sheadded, "I shall insist on their giving one also. I shall tell ColonelForster it will be quite a shame if he does not."Mrs. Bennet and her daughters then departed, and Elizabeth returnedinstantly to Jane, leaving her own and her relations' behaviour to theremarks of the two ladies and Mr. Darcy; the latter of whom, however,could not be prevailed on to join in their censure of _her_, in spite ofall Miss Bingley's witticisms on _fine eyes_.Chapter 10The day passed much as the day before had done. Mrs. Hurst and MissBingley had spent some hours of the morning with the invalid, whocontinued, though slowly, to mend; and in the evening Elizabeth joinedtheir party in the drawing-room. The loo-table, however, did not appear.Mr. Darcy was writing, and Miss Bingley, seated near him, was watchingthe progress of his letter and repeatedly calling off his attention bymessages to his sister. Mr. Hurst and Mr. Bingley were at piquet, andMrs. Hurst was observing their game.Elizabeth took up some needlework, and was sufficiently amused inattending to what passed between Darcy and his companion. The perpetualcommendations of the lady, either on his handwriting, or on the evennessof his lines, or on the length of his letter, with the perfect unconcernwith which her praises were received, formed a curious dialogue, and wasexactly in union with her opinion of each."How delighted Miss Darcy will be to receive such a letter!"He made no answer."You write uncommonly fast.""You are mistaken. I write rather slowly.""How many letters you must have occasion to write in the course of ayear! Letters of business, too! How odious I should think them!""It is fortunate, then, that they fall to my lot instead of yours.""Pray tell your sister that I long to see her.""I have already told her so once, by your desire.""I am afraid you do not like your pen. Let me mend it for you. I mendpens remarkably well.""Thank you--but I always mend my own.""How can you contrive to write so even?"He was silent."Tell your sister I am delighted to hear of her improvement on the harp;and pray let her know that I am quite in raptures with her beautifullittle design for a table, and I think it infinitely superior to MissGrantley's.""Will you give me leave to defer your raptures till I write again? Atpresent I have not room to do them justice.""Oh! it is of no consequence. I shall see her in January. But do youalways write such charming long letters to her, Mr. Darcy?""They are generally long; but whether always charming it is not for meto determine.""It is a rule with me, that a person who can write a long letter withease, cannot write ill.""That will not do for a compliment to Darcy, Caroline," cried herbrother, "because he does _not_ write with ease. He studies too much forwords of four syllables. Do not you, Darcy?""My style of writing is very different from yours.""Oh!" cried Miss Bingley, "Charles writes in the most careless wayimaginable. He leaves out half his words, and blots the rest.""My ideas flow so rapidly that I have not time to express them--by whichmeans my letters sometimes convey no ideas at all to my correspondents.""Your humility, Mr. Bingley," said Elizabeth, "must disarm reproof.""Nothing is more deceitful," said Darcy, "than the appearance ofhumility. It is often only carelessness of opinion, and sometimes anindirect boast.""And which of the two do you call _my_ little recent piece of modesty?""The indirect boast; for you are really proud of your defects inwriting, because you consider them as proceeding from a rapidity ofthought and carelessness of execution, which, if not estimable, youthink at least highly interesting. The power of doing anything withquickness is always prized much by the possessor, and often without anyattention to the imperfection of the performance. When you told Mrs.Bennet this morning that if you ever resolved upon quitting Netherfieldyou should be gone in five minutes, you meant it to be a sort ofpanegyric, of compliment to yourself--and yet what is there so verylaudable in a precipitance which must leave very necessary businessundone, and can be of no real advantage to yourself or anyone else?""Nay," cried Bingley, "this is too much, to remember at night all thefoolish things that were said in the morning. And yet, upon my honour,I believe what I said of myself to be true, and I believe it at thismoment. At least, therefore, I did not assume the character of needlessprecipitance merely to show off before the ladies.""I dare say you believed it; but I am by no means convinced thatyou would be gone with such celerity. Your conduct would be quite asdependent on chance as that of any man I know; and if, as you weremounting your horse, a friend were to say, 'Bingley, you had betterstay till next week,' you would probably do it, you would probably notgo--and at another word, might stay a month.""You have only proved by this," cried Elizabeth, "that Mr. Bingley didnot do justice to his own disposition. You have shown him off now muchmore than he did himself.""I am exceedingly gratified," said Bingley, "by your converting what myfriend says into a compliment on the sweetness of my temper. But I amafraid you are giving it a turn which that gentleman did by no meansintend; for he would certainly think better of me, if under such acircumstance I were to give a flat denial, and ride off as fast as Icould.""Would Mr. Darcy then consider the rashness of your original intentionsas atoned for by your obstinacy in adhering to it?""Upon my word, I cannot exactly explain the matter; Darcy must speak forhimself.""You expect me to account for opinions which you choose to call mine,but which I have never acknowledged. Allowing the case, however, tostand according to your representation, you must remember, Miss Bennet,that the friend who is supposed to desire his return to the house, andthe delay of his plan, has merely desired it, asked it without offeringone argument in favour of its propriety.""To yield readily--easily--to the _persuasion_ of a friend is no meritwith you.""To yield without conviction is no compliment to the understanding ofeither.""You appear to me, Mr. Darcy, to allow nothing for the influence offriendship and affection. A regard for the requester would often makeone readily yield to a request, without waiting for arguments to reasonone into it. I am not particularly speaking of such a case as you havesupposed about Mr. Bingley. We may as well wait, perhaps, till thecircumstance occurs before we discuss the discretion of his behaviourthereupon. But in general and ordinary cases between friend and friend,where one of them is desired by the other to change a resolution of novery great moment, should you think ill of that person for complyingwith the desire, without waiting to be argued into it?""Will it not be advisable, before we proceed on this subject, toarrange with rather more precision the degree of importance which is toappertain to this request, as well as the degree of intimacy subsistingbetween the parties?""By all means," cried Bingley; "let us hear all the particulars, notforgetting their comparative height and size; for that will have moreweight in the argument, Miss Bennet, than you may be aware of. I assureyou, that if Darcy were not such a great tall fellow, in comparison withmyself, I should not pay him half so much deference. I declare I do notknow a more awful object than Darcy, on particular occasions, and inparticular places; at his own house especially, and of a Sunday evening,when he has nothing to do."Mr. Darcy smiled; but Elizabeth thought she could perceive that he wasrather offended, and therefore checked her laugh. Miss Bingley warmlyresented the indignity he had received, in an expostulation with herbrother for talking such nonsense."I see your design, Bingley," said his friend. "You dislike an argument,and want to silence this.""Perhaps I do. Arguments are too much like disputes. If you and MissBennet will defer yours till I am out of the room, I shall be verythankful; and then you may say whatever you like of me.""What you ask," said Elizabeth, "is no sacrifice on my side; and Mr.Darcy had much better finish his letter."Mr. Darcy took her advice, and did finish his letter.
