The family of Dashwood had long been settled in Sussex.  Their estatewas large, and their residence was at Norland Park, in the centre oftheir property, where, for many generations, they had lived in sorespectable a manner as to engage the general good opinion of theirsurrounding acquaintance.  The late owner of this estate was a singleman, who lived to a very advanced age, and who for many years of hislife, had a constant companion and housekeeper in his sister.  But herdeath, which happened ten years before his own, produced a greatalteration in his home; for to supply her loss, he invited and receivedinto his house the family of his nephew Mr. Henry Dashwood, the legalinheritor of the Norland estate, and the person to whom he intended tobequeath it.  In the society of his nephew and niece, and theirchildren, the old Gentleman's days were comfortably spent.  Hisattachment to them all increased.  The constant attention of Mr. andMrs. Henry Dashwood to his wishes, which proceeded not merely frominterest, but from goodness of heart, gave him every degree of solidcomfort which his age could receive; and the cheerfulness of thechildren added a relish to his existence.By a former marriage, Mr. Henry Dashwood had one son: by his presentlady, three daughters.  The son, a steady respectable young man, wasamply provided for by the fortune of his mother, which had been large,and half of which devolved on him on his coming of age.  By his ownmarriage, likewise, which happened soon afterwards, he added to hiswealth.  To him therefore the succession to the Norland estate was notso really important as to his sisters; for their fortune, independentof what might arise to them from their father's inheriting thatproperty, could be but small.  Their mother had nothing, and theirfather only seven thousand pounds in his own disposal; for theremaining moiety of his first wife's fortune was also secured to herchild, and he had only a life-interest in it.The old gentleman died: his will was read, and like almost every otherwill, gave as much disappointment as pleasure.  He was neither sounjust, nor so ungrateful, as to leave his estate from his nephew;--buthe left it to him on such terms as destroyed half the value of thebequest.  Mr. Dashwood had wished for it more for the sake of his wifeand daughters than for himself or his son;--but to his son, and hisson's son, a child of four years old, it was secured, in such a way, asto leave to himself no power of providing for those who were most dearto him, and who most needed a provision by any charge on the estate, orby any sale of its valuable woods.  The whole was tied up for thebenefit of this child, who, in occasional visits with his father andmother at Norland, had so far gained on the affections of his uncle, bysuch attractions as are by no means unusual in children of two or threeyears old; an imperfect articulation, an earnest desire of having hisown way, many cunning tricks, and a great deal of noise, as to outweighall the value of all the attention which, for years, he had receivedfrom his niece and her daughters.  He meant not to be unkind, however,and, as a mark of his affection for the three girls, he left them athousand pounds a-piece.Mr. Dashwood's disappointment was, at first, severe; but his temper wascheerful and sanguine; and he might reasonably hope to live many years,and by living economically, lay by a considerable sum from the produceof an estate already large, and capable of almost immediateimprovement.  But the fortune, which had been so tardy in coming, washis only one twelvemonth.  He survived his uncle no longer; and tenthousand pounds, including the late legacies, was all that remained forhis widow and daughters.His son was sent for as soon as his danger was known, and to him Mr.Dashwood recommended, with all the strength and urgency which illnesscould command, the interest of his mother-in-law and sisters.Mr. John Dashwood had not the strong feelings of the rest of thefamily; but he was affected by a recommendation of such a nature atsuch a time, and he promised to do every thing in his power to makethem comfortable.  His father was rendered easy by such an assurance,and Mr. John Dashwood had then leisure to consider how much there mightprudently be in his power to do for them.He was not an ill-disposed young man, unless to be rather cold heartedand rather selfish is to be ill-disposed: but he was, in general, wellrespected; for he conducted himself with propriety in the discharge ofhis ordinary duties.  Had he married a more amiable woman, he mighthave been made still more respectable than he was:--he might even havebeen made amiable himself; for he was very young when he married, andvery fond of his wife.  But Mrs. John Dashwood was a strong caricatureof himself;--more narrow-minded and selfish.When he gave his promise to his father, he meditated within himself toincrease the fortunes of his sisters by the present of a thousandpounds a-piece.  He then really thought himself equal to it.  Theprospect of four thousand a-year, in addition to his present income,besides the remaining half of his own mother's fortune, warmed hisheart, and made him feel capable of generosity.-- "Yes, he would givethem three thousand pounds: it would be liberal and handsome! It wouldbe enough to make them completely easy.  Three thousand pounds! hecould spare so considerable a sum with little inconvenience."-- Hethought of it all day long, and for many days successively, and he didnot repent.No sooner was his father's funeral over, than Mrs. John Dashwood,without sending any notice of her intention to her mother-in-law,arrived with her child and their attendants.  No one could dispute herright to come; the house was her husband's from the moment of hisfather's decease; but the indelicacy of her conduct was so much thegreater, and to a woman in Mrs. Dashwood's situation, with only commonfeelings, must have been highly unpleasing;--but in HER mind there wasa sense of honor so keen, a generosity so romantic, that any offence ofthe kind, by whomsoever given or received, was to her a source ofimmovable disgust.  Mrs. John Dashwood had never been a favourite withany of her husband's family; but she had had no opportunity, till thepresent, of shewing them with how little attention to the comfort ofother people she could act when occasion required it.So acutely did Mrs. Dashwood feel this ungracious behaviour, and soearnestly did she despise her daughter-in-law for it, that, on thearrival of the latter, she would have quitted the house for ever, hadnot the entreaty of her eldest girl induced her first to reflect on thepropriety of going, and her own tender love for all her three childrendetermined her afterwards to stay, and for their sakes avoid a breachwith their brother.Elinor, this eldest daughter, whose advice was so effectual, possesseda strength of understanding, and coolness of judgment, which qualifiedher, though only nineteen, to be the counsellor of her mother, andenabled her frequently to counteract, to the advantage of them all,that eagerness of mind in Mrs. Dashwood which must generally have ledto imprudence.  She had an excellent heart;--her disposition wasaffectionate, and her feelings were strong; but she knew how to governthem: it was a knowledge which her mother had yet to learn; and whichone of her sisters had resolved never to be taught.Marianne's abilities were, in many respects, quite equal to Elinor's.She was sensible and clever; but eager in everything: her sorrows, herjoys, could have no moderation.  She was generous, amiable,interesting: she was everything but prudent.  The resemblance betweenher and her mother was strikingly great.Elinor saw, with concern, the excess of her sister's sensibility; butby Mrs. Dashwood it was valued and cherished.  They encouraged eachother now in the violence of their affliction.  The agony of griefwhich overpowered them at first, was voluntarily renewed, was soughtfor, was created again and again.  They gave themselves up wholly totheir sorrow, seeking increase of wretchedness in every reflection thatcould afford it, and resolved against ever admitting consolation infuture.  Elinor, too, was deeply afflicted; but still she couldstruggle, she could exert herself.  She could consult with her brother,could receive her sister-in-law on her arrival, and treat her withproper attention; and could strive to rouse her mother to similarexertion, and encourage her to similar forbearance.Margaret, the other sister, was a good-humored, well-disposed girl; butas she had already imbibed a good deal of Marianne's romance, withouthaving much of her sense, she did not, at thirteen, bid fair to equalher sisters at a more advanced period of life.Mrs. John Dashwood now installed herself mistress of Norland; and hermother and sisters-in-law were degraded to the condition of visitors.As such, however, they were treated by her with quiet civility; and byher husband with as much kindness as he could feel towards anybodybeyond himself, his wife, and their child.  He really pressed them,with some earnestness, to consider Norland as their home; and, as noplan appeared so eligible to Mrs. Dashwood as remaining there till shecould accommodate herself with a house in the neighbourhood, hisinvitation was accepted.A continuance in a place where everything reminded her of formerdelight, was exactly what suited her mind.  In seasons of cheerfulness,no temper could be more cheerful than hers, or possess, in a greaterdegree, that sanguine expectation of happiness which is happinessitself.  But in sorrow she must be equally carried away by her fancy,and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure she was beyond alloy.Mrs. John Dashwood did not at all approve of what her husband intendedto do for his sisters.  To take three thousand pounds from the fortuneof their dear little boy would be impoverishing him to the mostdreadful degree.  She begged him to think again on the subject.  Howcould he answer it to himself to rob his child, and his only child too,of so large a sum?  And what possible claim could the Miss Dashwoods,who were related to him only by half blood, which she considered as norelationship at all, have on his generosity to so large an amount.  Itwas very well known that no affection was ever supposed to existbetween the children of any man by different marriages; and why was heto ruin himself, and their poor little Harry, by giving away all hismoney to his half sisters?"It was my father's last request to me," replied her husband, "that Ishould assist his widow and daughters.""He did not know what he was talking of, I dare say; ten to one but hewas light-headed at the time.  Had he been in his right senses, hecould not have thought of such a thing as begging you to give away halfyour fortune from your own child.""He did not stipulate for any particular sum, my dear Fanny; he onlyrequested me, in general terms, to assist them, and make theirsituation more comfortable than it was in his power to do.  Perhaps itwould have been as well if he had left it wholly to myself.  He couldhardly suppose I should neglect them.  But as he required the promise,I could not do less than give it; at least I thought so at the time.The promise, therefore, was given, and must be performed.  Somethingmust be done for them whenever they leave Norland and settle in a newhome.""Well, then, LET something be done for them; but THAT something neednot be three thousand pounds.  Consider," she added, "that when themoney is once parted with, it never can return.  Your sisters willmarry, and it will be gone for ever.  If, indeed, it could be restoredto our poor little boy--""Why, to be sure," said her husband, very gravely, "that would makegreat difference.  The time may come when Harry will regret that solarge a sum was parted with.  If he should have a numerous family, forinstance, it would be a very convenient addition.""To be sure it would.""Perhaps, then, it would be better for all parties, if the sum werediminished one half.--Five hundred pounds would be a prodigiousincrease to their fortunes!""Oh! beyond anything great!  What brother on earth would do half somuch for his sisters, even if REALLY his sisters!  And as it is--onlyhalf blood!--But you have such a generous spirit!""I would not wish to do any thing mean," he replied.  "One had rather,on such occasions, do too much than too little.  No one, at least, canthink I have not done enough for them: even themselves, they can hardlyexpect more.""There is no knowing what THEY may expect," said the lady, "but we arenot to think of their expectations: the question is, what you canafford to do.""Certainly--and I think I may afford to give them five hundred poundsa-piece.  As it is, without any addition of mine, they will each haveabout three thousand pounds on their mother's death--a very comfortablefortune for any young woman.""To be sure it is; and, indeed, it strikes me that they can want noaddition at all.  They will have ten thousand pounds divided amongstthem.  If they marry, they will be sure of doing well, and if they donot, they may all live very comfortably together on the interest of tenthousand pounds.""That is very true, and, therefore, I do not know whether, upon thewhole, it would not be more advisable to do something for their motherwhile she lives, rather than for them--something of the annuity kind Imean.--My sisters would feel the good effects of it as well as herself.A hundred a year would make them all perfectly comfortable."His wife hesitated a little, however, in giving her consent to thisplan."To be sure," said she, "it is better than parting with fifteen hundredpounds at once.  But, then, if Mrs. Dashwood should live fifteen yearswe shall be completely taken in.""Fifteen years! my dear Fanny; her life cannot be worth half thatpurchase.""Certainly not; but if you observe, people always live for ever whenthere is an annuity to be paid them; and she is very stout and healthy,and hardly forty.  An annuity is a very serious business; it comes overand over every year, and there is no getting rid of it.  You are notaware of what you are doing.  I have known a great deal of the troubleof annuities; for my mother was clogged with the payment of three toold superannuated servants by my father's will, and it is amazing howdisagreeable she found it.  Twice every year these annuities were to bepaid; and then there was the trouble of getting it to them; and thenone of them was said to have died, and afterwards it turned out to beno such thing.  My mother was quite sick of it.  Her income was not herown, she said, with such perpetual claims on it; and it was the moreunkind in my father, because, otherwise, the money would have beenentirely at my mother's disposal, without any restriction whatever.  Ithas given me such an abhorrence of annuities, that I am sure I wouldnot pin myself down to the payment of one for all the world.""It is certainly an unpleasant thing," replied Mr. Dashwood, "to havethose kind of yearly drains on one's income.  One's fortune, as yourmother justly says, is NOT one's own.  To be tied down to the regularpayment of such a sum, on every rent day, is by no means desirable: ittakes away one's independence.""Undoubtedly; and after all you have no thanks for it.  They thinkthemselves secure, you do no more than what is expected, and it raisesno gratitude at all.  If I were you, whatever I did should be done atmy own discretion entirely.  I would not bind myself to allow them anything yearly.  It may be very inconvenient some years to spare ahundred, or even fifty pounds from our own expenses.""I believe you are right, my love; it will be better that there shouldbe no annuity in the case; whatever I may give them occasionally willbe of far greater assistance than a yearly allowance, because theywould only enlarge their style of living if they felt sure of a largerincome, and would not be sixpence the richer for it at the end of theyear.  It will certainly be much the best way.  A present of fiftypounds, now and then, will prevent their ever being distressed formoney, and will, I think, be amply discharging my promise to my father.""To be sure it will.  Indeed, to say the truth, I am convinced withinmyself that your father had no idea of your giving them any money atall.  The assistance he thought of, I dare say, was only such as mightbe reasonably expected of you; for instance, such as looking out for acomfortable small house for them, helping them to move their things,and sending them presents of fish and game, and so forth, whenever theyare in season.  I'll lay my life that he meant nothing farther; indeed,it would be very strange and unreasonable if he did.  Do but consider,my dear Mr. Dashwood, how excessively comfortable your mother-in-lawand her daughters may live on the interest of seven thousand pounds,besides the thousand pounds belonging to each of the girls, whichbrings them in fifty pounds a year a-piece, and, of course, they willpay their mother for their board out of it.  Altogether, they will havefive hundred a-year amongst them, and what on earth can four women wantfor more than that?--They will live so cheap! Their housekeeping willbe nothing at all.  They will have no carriage, no horses, and hardlyany servants; they will keep no company, and can have no expenses ofany kind!  Only conceive how comfortable they will be!  Five hundred ayear! I am sure I cannot imagine how they will spend half of it; and asto your giving them more, it is quite absurd to think of it.  They willbe much more able to give YOU something.""Upon my word," said Mr. Dashwood, "I believe you are perfectly right.My father certainly could mean nothing more by his request to me thanwhat you say.  I clearly understand it now, and I will strictly fulfilmy engagement by such acts of assistance and kindness to them as youhave described.  When my mother removes into another house my servicesshall be readily given to accommodate her as far as I can.  Some littlepresent of furniture too may be acceptable then.""Certainly," returned Mrs. John Dashwood.  "But, however, ONE thingmust be considered.  When your father and mother moved to Norland,though the furniture of Stanhill was sold, all the china, plate, andlinen was saved, and is now left to your mother.  Her house willtherefore be almost completely fitted up as soon as she takes it.""That is a material consideration undoubtedly.  A valuable legacyindeed! And yet some of the plate would have been a very pleasantaddition to our own stock here.""Yes; and the set of breakfast china is twice as handsome as whatbelongs to this house.  A great deal too handsome, in my opinion, forany place THEY can ever afford to live in.  But, however, so it is.Your father thought only of THEM.  And I must say this: that you owe noparticular gratitude to him, nor attention to his wishes; for we verywell know that if he could, he would have left almost everything in theworld to THEM."This argument was irresistible.  It gave to his intentions whatever ofdecision was wanting before; and he finally resolved, that it would beabsolutely unnecessary, if not highly indecorous, to do more for thewidow and children of his father, than such kind of neighbourly acts ashis own wife pointed out.Mrs. Dashwood remained at Norland several months; not from anydisinclination to move when the sight of every well known spot ceasedto raise the violent emotion which it produced for a while; for whenher spirits began to revive, and her mind became capable of some otherexertion than that of heightening its affliction by melancholyremembrances, she was impatient to be gone, and indefatigable in herinquiries for a suitable dwelling in the neighbourhood of Norland; forto remove far from that beloved spot was impossible.  But she couldhear of no situation that at once answered her notions of comfort andease, and suited the prudence of her eldest daughter, whose steadierjudgment rejected several houses as too large for their income, whichher mother would have approved.Mrs. Dashwood had been informed by her husband of the solemn promise onthe part of his son in their favour, which gave comfort to his lastearthly reflections.  She doubted the sincerity of this assurance nomore than he had doubted it himself, and she thought of it for herdaughters' sake with satisfaction, though as for herself she waspersuaded that a much smaller provision than 7000L would support her inaffluence.  For their brother's sake, too, for the sake of his ownheart, she rejoiced; and she reproached herself for being unjust to hismerit before, in believing him incapable of generosity.  His attentivebehaviour to herself and his sisters convinced her that their welfarewas dear to him, and, for a long time, she firmly relied on theliberality of his intentions.The contempt which she had, very early in their acquaintance, felt forher daughter-in-law, was very much increased by the farther knowledgeof her character, which half a year's residence in her family afforded;and perhaps in spite of every consideration of politeness or maternalaffection on the side of the former, the two ladies might have found itimpossible to have lived together so long, had not a particularcircumstance occurred to give still greater eligibility, according tothe opinions of Mrs. Dashwood, to her daughters' continuance at Norland.This circumstance was a growing attachment between her eldest girl andthe brother of Mrs. John Dashwood, a gentleman-like and pleasing youngman, who was introduced to their acquaintance soon after his sister'sestablishment at Norland, and who had since spent the greatest part ofhis time there.Some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy from motives ofinterest, for Edward Ferrars was the eldest son of a man who had diedvery rich; and some might have repressed it from motives of prudence,for, except a trifling sum, the whole of his fortune depended on thewill of his mother.  But Mrs. Dashwood was alike uninfluenced by eitherconsideration.  It was enough for her that he appeared to be amiable,that he loved her daughter, and that Elinor returned the partiality.It was contrary to every doctrine of hers that difference of fortuneshould keep any couple asunder who were attracted by resemblance ofdisposition; and that Elinor's merit should not be acknowledged byevery one who knew her, was to her comprehension impossible.Edward Ferrars was not recommended to their good opinion by anypeculiar graces of person or address.  He was not handsome, and hismanners required intimacy to make them pleasing.  He was too diffidentto do justice to himself; but when his natural shyness was overcome,his behaviour gave every indication of an open, affectionate heart.His understanding was good, and his education had given it solidimprovement.  But he was neither fitted by abilities nor disposition toanswer the wishes of his mother and sister, who longed to see himdistinguished--as--they hardly knew what.  They wanted him to make afine figure in the world in some manner or other.  His mother wished tointerest him in political concerns, to get him into parliament, or tosee him connected with some of the great men of the day.  Mrs. JohnDashwood wished it likewise; but in the mean while, till one of thesesuperior blessings could be attained, it would have quieted herambition to see him driving a barouche.  But Edward had no turn forgreat men or barouches.  All his wishes centered in domestic comfortand the quiet of private life.  Fortunately he had a younger brotherwho was more promising.Edward had been staying several weeks in the house before he engagedmuch of Mrs. Dashwood's attention; for she was, at that time, in suchaffliction as rendered her careless of surrounding objects.  She sawonly that he was quiet and unobtrusive, and she liked him for it.  Hedid not disturb the wretchedness of her mind by ill-timed conversation.She was first called to observe and approve him farther, by areflection which Elinor chanced one day to make on the differencebetween him and his sister.  It was a contrast which recommended himmost forcibly to her mother."It is enough," said she; "to say that he is unlike Fanny is enough.It implies everything amiable.  I love him already.""I think you will like him," said Elinor, "when you know more of him.""Like him!" replied her mother with a smile.  "I feel no sentiment ofapprobation inferior to love.""You may esteem him.""I have never yet known what it was to separate esteem and love."Mrs. Dashwood now took pains to get acquainted with him.  Her mannerswere attaching, and soon banished his reserve.  She speedilycomprehended all his merits; the persuasion of his regard for Elinorperhaps assisted her penetration; but she really felt assured of hisworth: and even that quietness of manner, which militated against allher established ideas of what a young man's address ought to be, was nolonger uninteresting when she knew his heart to be warm and his temperaffectionate.No sooner did she perceive any symptom of love in his behaviour toElinor, than she considered their serious attachment as certain, andlooked forward to their marriage as rapidly approaching."In a few months, my dear Marianne." said she, "Elinor will, in allprobability be settled for life.  We shall miss her; but SHE will behappy.""Oh! Mama, how shall we do without her?""My love, it will be scarcely a separation.  We shall live within a fewmiles of each other, and shall meet every day of our lives.  You willgain a brother, a real, affectionate brother.  I have the highestopinion in the world of Edward's heart.  But you look grave, Marianne;do you disapprove your sister's choice?""Perhaps," said Marianne, "I may consider it with some surprise.Edward is very amiable, and I love him tenderly.  But yet--he is notthe kind of young man--there is something wanting--his figure is notstriking; it has none of that grace which I should expect in the manwho could seriously attach my sister.  His eyes want all that spirit,that fire, which at once announce virtue and intelligence.  And besidesall this, I am afraid, Mama, he has no real taste.  Music seemsscarcely to attract him, and though he admires Elinor's drawings verymuch, it is not the admiration of a person who can understand theirworth.  It is evident, in spite of his frequent attention to her whileshe draws, that in fact he knows nothing of the matter.  He admires asa lover, not as a connoisseur.  To satisfy me, those characters must beunited.  I could not be happy with a man whose taste did not in everypoint coincide with my own.  He must enter into all my feelings; thesame books, the same music must charm us both.  Oh! mama, howspiritless, how tame was Edward's manner in reading to us last night!I felt for my sister most severely.  Yet she bore it with so muchcomposure, she seemed scarcely to notice it.  I could hardly keep myseat.  To hear those beautiful lines which have frequently almostdriven me wild, pronounced with such impenetrable calmness, suchdreadful indifference!""He would certainly have done more justice to simple and elegant prose.I thought so at the time; but you WOULD give him Cowper.""Nay, Mama, if he is not to be animated by Cowper!--but we must allowfor difference of taste.  Elinor has not my feelings, and therefore shemay overlook it, and be happy with him.  But it would have broke MYheart, had I loved him, to hear him read with so little sensibility.Mama, the more I know of the world, the more am I convinced that Ishall never see a man whom I can really love.  I require so much!  Hemust have all Edward's virtues, and his person and manners mustornament his goodness with every possible charm.""Remember, my love, that you are not seventeen.  It is yet too early inlife to despair of such a happiness.  Why should you be less fortunatethan your mother?  In one circumstance only, my Marianne, may yourdestiny be different from hers!""What a pity it is, Elinor," said Marianne, "that Edward should have notaste for drawing.""No taste for drawing!" replied Elinor, "why should you think so? Hedoes not draw himself, indeed, but he has great pleasure in seeing theperformances of other people, and I assure you he is by no meansdeficient in natural taste, though he has not had opportunities ofimproving it.  Had he ever been in the way of learning, I think hewould have drawn very well.  He distrusts his own judgment in suchmatters so much, that he is always unwilling to give his opinion on anypicture; but he has an innate propriety and simplicity of taste, whichin general direct him perfectly right."Marianne was afraid of offending, and said no more on the subject; butthe kind of approbation which Elinor described as excited in him by thedrawings of other people, was very far from that rapturous delight,which, in her opinion, could alone be called taste.  Yet, thoughsmiling within herself at the mistake, she honoured her sister for thatblind partiality to Edward which produced it."I hope, Marianne," continued Elinor, "you do not consider him asdeficient in general taste.  Indeed, I think I may say that you cannot,for your behaviour to him is perfectly cordial, and if THAT were youropinion, I am sure you could never be civil to him."Marianne hardly knew what to say.  She would not wound the feelings ofher sister on any account, and yet to say what she did not believe wasimpossible.  At length she replied:"Do not be offended, Elinor, if my praise of him is not in every thingequal to your sense of his merits.  I have not had so manyopportunities of estimating the minuter propensities of his mind, hisinclinations and tastes, as you have; but I have the highest opinion inthe world of his goodness and sense.  I think him every thing that isworthy and amiable.""I am sure," replied Elinor, with a smile, "that his dearest friendscould not be dissatisfied with such commendation as that.  I do notperceive how you could express yourself more warmly."Marianne was rejoiced to find her sister so easily pleased."Of his sense and his goodness," continued Elinor, "no one can, Ithink, be in doubt, who has seen him often enough to engage him inunreserved conversation.  The excellence of his understanding and hisprinciples can be concealed only by that shyness which too often keepshim silent.  You know enough of him to do justice to his solid worth.But of his minuter propensities, as you call them you have frompeculiar circumstances been kept more ignorant than myself.  He and Ihave been at times thrown a good deal together, while you have beenwholly engrossed on the most affectionate principle by my mother.  Ihave seen a great deal of him, have studied his sentiments and heardhis opinion on subjects of literature and taste; and, upon the whole, Iventure to pronounce that his mind is well-informed, enjoyment of booksexceedingly great, his imagination lively, his observation just andcorrect, and his taste delicate and pure.  His abilities in everyrespect improve as much upon acquaintance as his manners and person.At first sight, his address is certainly not striking; and his personcan hardly be called handsome, till the expression of his eyes, whichare uncommonly good, and the general sweetness of his countenance, isperceived.  At present, I know him so well, that I think him reallyhandsome; or at least, almost so.  What say you, Marianne?""I shall very soon think him handsome, Elinor, if I do not now.  Whenyou tell me to love him as a brother, I shall no more see imperfectionin his face, than I now do in his heart."Elinor started at this declaration, and was sorry for the warmth shehad been betrayed into, in speaking of him.  She felt that Edward stoodvery high in her opinion.  She believed the regard to be mutual; butshe required greater certainty of it to make Marianne's conviction oftheir attachment agreeable to her.  She knew that what Marianne and hermother conjectured one moment, they believed the next--that with them,to wish was to hope, and to hope was to expect.  She tried to explainthe real state of the case to her sister."I do not attempt to deny," said she, "that I think very highly ofhim--that I greatly esteem, that I like him."Marianne here burst forth with indignation--"Esteem him! Like him! Cold-hearted Elinor! Oh!  worse thancold-hearted! Ashamed of being otherwise.  Use those words again, and Iwill leave the room this moment."Elinor could not help laughing.  "Excuse me," said she; "and be assuredthat I meant no offence to you, by speaking, in so quiet a way, of myown feelings.  Believe them to be stronger than I have declared;believe them, in short, to be such as his merit, and the suspicion--thehope of his affection for me may warrant, without imprudence or folly.But farther than this you must not believe.  I am by no means assuredof his regard for me.  There are moments when the extent of it seemsdoubtful; and till his sentiments are fully known, you cannot wonder atmy wishing to avoid any encouragement of my own partiality, bybelieving or calling it more than it is.  In my heart I feellittle--scarcely any doubt of his preference.  But there are otherpoints to be considered besides his inclination.  He is very far frombeing independent.  What his mother really is we cannot know; but, fromFanny's occasional mention of her conduct and opinions, we have neverbeen disposed to think her amiable; and I am very much mistaken ifEdward is not himself aware that there would be many difficulties inhis way, if he were to wish to marry a woman who had not either a greatfortune or high rank."Marianne was astonished to find how much the imagination of her motherand herself had outstripped the truth."And you really are not engaged to him!" said she.  "Yet it certainlysoon will happen.  But two advantages will proceed from this delay.  Ishall not lose you so soon, and Edward will have greater opportunity ofimproving that natural taste for your favourite pursuit which must beso indispensably necessary to your future felicity.  Oh! if he shouldbe so far stimulated by your genius as to learn to draw himself, howdelightful it would be!"Elinor had given her real opinion to her sister.  She could notconsider her partiality for Edward in so prosperous a state as Mariannehad believed it.  There was, at times, a want of spirits about himwhich, if it did not denote indifference, spoke of something almost asunpromising.  A doubt of her regard, supposing him to feel it, need notgive him more than inquietude.  It would not be likely to produce thatdejection of mind which frequently attended him.  A more reasonablecause might be found in the dependent situation which forbade theindulgence of his affection.  She knew that his mother neither behavedto him so as to make his home comfortable at present, nor to give himany assurance that he might form a home for himself, without strictlyattending to her views for his aggrandizement.  With such a knowledgeas this, it was impossible for Elinor to feel easy on the subject.  Shewas far from depending on that result of his preference of her, whichher mother and sister still considered as certain.  Nay, the longerthey were together the more doubtful seemed the nature of his regard;and sometimes, for a few painful minutes, she believed it to be no morethan friendship.But, whatever might really be its limits, it was enough, when perceivedby his sister, to make her uneasy, and at the same time, (which wasstill more common,) to make her uncivil.  She took the firstopportunity of affronting her mother-in-law on the occasion, talking toher so expressively of her brother's great expectations, of Mrs.Ferrars's resolution that both her sons should marry well, and of thedanger attending any young woman who attempted to DRAW HIM IN; thatMrs. Dashwood could neither pretend to be unconscious, nor endeavor tobe calm.  She gave her an answer which marked her contempt, andinstantly left the room, resolving that, whatever might be theinconvenience or expense of so sudden a removal, her beloved Elinorshould not be exposed another week to such insinuations.In this state of her spirits, a letter was delivered to her from thepost, which contained a proposal particularly well timed.  It was theoffer of a small house, on very easy terms, belonging to a relation ofher own, a gentleman of consequence and property in Devonshire.  Theletter was from this gentleman himself, and written in the true spiritof friendly accommodation.  He understood that she was in need of adwelling; and though the house he now offered her was merely a cottage,he assured her that everything should be done to it which she mightthink necessary, if the situation pleased her.  He earnestly pressedher, after giving the particulars of the house and garden, to come withher daughters to Barton Park, the place of his own residence, fromwhence she might judge, herself, whether Barton Cottage, for the houseswere in the same parish, could, by any alteration, be made comfortableto her.  He seemed really anxious to accommodate them and the whole ofhis letter was written in so friendly a style as could not fail ofgiving pleasure to his cousin; more especially at a moment when she wassuffering under the cold and unfeeling behaviour of her nearerconnections.  She needed no time for deliberation or inquiry.  Herresolution was formed as she read.  The situation of Barton, in acounty so far distant from Sussex as Devonshire, which, but a few hoursbefore, would have been a sufficient objection to outweigh everypossible advantage belonging to the place, was now its firstrecommendation.  To quit the neighbourhood of Norland was no longer anevil; it was an object of desire; it was a blessing, in comparison ofthe misery of continuing her daughter-in-law's guest; and to remove forever from that beloved place would be less painful than to inhabit orvisit it while such a woman was its mistress.  She instantly wrote SirJohn Middleton her acknowledgment of his kindness, and her acceptanceof his proposal; and then hastened to shew both letters to herdaughters, that she might be secure of their approbation before heranswer were sent.Elinor had always thought it would be more prudent for them to settleat some distance from Norland, than immediately amongst their presentacquaintance.  On THAT head, therefore, it was not for her to opposeher mother's intention of removing into Devonshire.  The house, too, asdescribed by Sir John, was on so simple a scale, and the rent souncommonly moderate, as to leave her no right of objection on eitherpoint; and, therefore, though it was not a plan which brought any charmto her fancy, though it was a removal from the vicinity of Norlandbeyond her wishes, she made no attempt to dissuade her mother fromsending a letter of acquiescence.No sooner was her answer dispatched, than Mrs. Dashwood indulged herselfin the pleasure of announcing to her son-in-law and his wife that shewas provided with a house, and should incommode them no longer than tillevery thing were ready for her inhabiting it. They heard her withsurprise. Mrs. John Dashwood said nothing; but her husband civilly hopedthat she would not be settled far from Norland. She had greatsatisfaction in replying that she was going into Devonshire.--Edwardturned hastily towards her, on hearing this, and, in a voice of surpriseand concern, which required no explanation to her, repeated,"Devonshire! Are you, indeed, going there? So far from hence! And towhat part of it?" She explained the situation. It was within four milesnorthward of Exeter."It is but a cottage," she continued, "but I hope to see many of myfriends in it.  A room or two can easily be added; and if my friendsfind no difficulty in travelling so far to see me, I am sure I willfind none in accommodating them."She concluded with a very kind invitation to Mr. and Mrs. John Dashwoodto visit her at Barton; and to Edward she gave one with still greateraffection.  Though her late conversation with her daughter-in-law hadmade her resolve on remaining at Norland no longer than wasunavoidable, it had not produced the smallest effect on her in thatpoint to which it principally tended.  To separate Edward and Elinorwas as far from being her object as ever; and she wished to show Mrs.John Dashwood, by this pointed invitation to her brother, how totallyshe disregarded her disapprobation of the match.Mr. John Dashwood told his mother again and again how exceedingly sorryhe was that she had taken a house at such a distance from Norland as toprevent his being of any service to her in removing her furniture.  Hereally felt conscientiously vexed on the occasion; for the veryexertion to which he had limited the performance of his promise to hisfather was by this arrangement rendered impracticable.-- The furniturewas all sent around by water.  It chiefly consisted of household linen,plate, china, and books, with a handsome pianoforte of Marianne's.Mrs. John Dashwood saw the packages depart with a sigh: she could nothelp feeling it hard that as Mrs. Dashwood's income would be sotrifling in comparison with their own, she should have any handsomearticle of furniture.Mrs. Dashwood took the house for a twelvemonth; it was ready furnished,and she might have immediate possession.  No difficulty arose on eitherside in the agreement; and she waited only for the disposal of hereffects at Norland, and to determine her future household, before sheset off for the west; and this, as she was exceedingly rapid in theperformance of everything that interested her, was soon done.--Thehorses which were left her by her husband had been sold soon after hisdeath, and an opportunity now offering of disposing of her carriage,she agreed to sell that likewise at the earnest advice of her eldestdaughter.  For the comfort of her children, had she consulted only herown wishes, she would have kept it; but the discretion of Elinorprevailed.  HER wisdom too limited the number of their servants tothree; two maids and a man, with whom they were speedily provided fromamongst those who had formed their establishment at Norland.The man and one of the maids were sent off immediately into Devonshire,to prepare the house for their mistress's arrival; for as LadyMiddleton was entirely unknown to Mrs. Dashwood, she preferred goingdirectly to the cottage to being a visitor at Barton Park; and sherelied so undoubtingly on Sir John's description of the house, as tofeel no curiosity to examine it herself till she entered it as her own.Her eagerness to be gone from Norland was preserved from diminution bythe evident satisfaction of her daughter-in-law in the prospect of herremoval; a satisfaction which was but feebly attempted to be concealedunder a cold invitation to her to defer her departure.  Now was thetime when her son-in-law's promise to his father might with particularpropriety be fulfilled.  Since he had neglected to do it on firstcoming to the estate, their quitting his house might be looked on asthe most suitable period for its accomplishment.  But Mrs. Dashwoodbegan shortly to give over every hope of the kind, and to be convinced,from the general drift of his discourse, that his assistance extendedno farther than their maintenance for six months at Norland.  He sofrequently talked of the increasing expenses of housekeeping, and ofthe perpetual demands upon his purse, which a man of any consequence inthe world was beyond calculation exposed to, that he seemed rather tostand in need of more money himself than to have any design of givingmoney away.In a very few weeks from the day which brought Sir John Middleton'sfirst letter to Norland, every thing was so far settled in their futureabode as to enable Mrs. Dashwood and her daughters to begin theirjourney.Many were the tears shed by them in their last adieus to a place somuch beloved.  "Dear, dear Norland!" said Marianne, as she wanderedalone before the house, on the last evening of their being there; "whenshall I cease to regret you!--when learn to feel a home elsewhere!--Oh!happy house, could you know what I suffer in now viewing you from thisspot, from whence perhaps I may view you no more!--And you, yewell-known trees!--but you will continue the same.--No leaf will decaybecause we are removed, nor any branch become motionless although wecan observe you no longer!--No; you will continue the same; unconsciousof the pleasure or the regret you occasion, and insensible of anychange in those who walk under your shade!--But who will remain toenjoy you?"The first part of their journey was performed in too melancholy adisposition to be otherwise than tedious and unpleasant.  But as theydrew towards the end of it, their interest in the appearance of acountry which they were to inhabit overcame their dejection, and a viewof Barton Valley as they entered it gave them cheerfulness.  It was apleasant fertile spot, well wooded, and rich in pasture.  After windingalong it for more than a mile, they reached their own house.  A smallgreen court was the whole of its demesne in front; and a neat wicketgate admitted them into it.As a house, Barton Cottage, though small, was comfortable and compact;but as a cottage it was defective, for the building was regular, theroof was tiled, the window shutters were not painted green, nor werethe walls covered with honeysuckles.  A narrow passage led directlythrough the house into the garden behind.  On each side of the entrancewas a sitting room, about sixteen feet square; and beyond them were theoffices and the stairs.  Four bed-rooms and two garrets formed the restof the house.  It had not been built many years and was in good repair.In comparison of Norland, it was poor and small indeed!--but the tearswhich recollection called forth as they entered the house were soondried away.  They were cheered by the joy of the servants on theirarrival, and each for the sake of the others resolved to appear happy.It was very early in September; the season was fine, and from firstseeing the place under the advantage of good weather, they received animpression in its favour which was of material service in recommendingit to their lasting approbation.The situation of the house was good.  High hills rose immediatelybehind, and at no great distance on each side; some of which were opendowns, the others cultivated and woody.  The village of Barton waschiefly on one of these hills, and formed a pleasant view from thecottage windows.  The prospect in front was more extensive; itcommanded the whole of the valley, and reached into the country beyond.The hills which surrounded the cottage terminated the valley in thatdirection; under another name, and in another course, it branched outagain between two of the steepest of them.With the size and furniture of the house Mrs. Dashwood was upon thewhole well satisfied; for though her former style of life rendered manyadditions to the latter indispensable, yet to add and improve was adelight to her; and she had at this time ready money enough to supplyall that was wanted of greater elegance to the apartments.  "As for thehouse itself, to be sure," said she, "it is too small for our family,but we will make ourselves tolerably comfortable for the present, as itis too late in the year for improvements.  Perhaps in the spring, if Ihave plenty of money, as I dare say I shall, we may think aboutbuilding.  These parlors are both too small for such parties of ourfriends as I hope to see often collected here; and I have some thoughtsof throwing the passage into one of them with perhaps a part of theother, and so leave the remainder of that other for an entrance; this,with a new drawing room which may be easily added, and a bed-chamberand garret above, will make it a very snug little cottage.  I couldwish the stairs were handsome.  But one must not expect every thing;though I suppose it would be no difficult matter to widen them.  Ishall see how much I am before-hand with the world in the spring, andwe will plan our improvements accordingly."In the mean time, till all these alterations could be made from thesavings of an income of five hundred a-year by a woman who never savedin her life, they were wise enough to be contented with the house as itwas; and each of them was busy in arranging their particular concerns,and endeavoring, by placing around them books and other possessions, toform themselves a home.  Marianne's pianoforte was unpacked andproperly disposed of; and Elinor's drawings were affixed to the wallsof their sitting room.In such employments as these they were interrupted soon after breakfastthe next day by the entrance of their landlord, who called to welcomethem to Barton, and to offer them every accommodation from his ownhouse and garden in which theirs might at present be deficient.  SirJohn Middleton was a good looking man about forty.  He had formerlyvisited at Stanhill, but it was too long for his young cousins toremember him.  His countenance was thoroughly good-humoured; and hismanners were as friendly as the style of his letter.  Their arrivalseemed to afford him real satisfaction, and their comfort to be anobject of real solicitude to him.  He said much of his earnest desireof their living in the most sociable terms with his family, and pressedthem so cordially to dine at Barton Park every day till they werebetter settled at home, that, though his entreaties were carried to apoint of perseverance beyond civility, they could not give offence.His kindness was not confined to words; for within an hour after heleft them, a large basket full of garden stuff and fruit arrived fromthe park, which was followed before the end of the day by a present ofgame.  He insisted, moreover, on conveying all their letters to andfrom the post for them, and would not be denied the satisfaction ofsending them his newspaper every day.Lady Middleton had sent a very civil message by him, denoting herintention of waiting on Mrs. Dashwood as soon as she could be assuredthat her visit would be no inconvenience; and as this message wasanswered by an invitation equally polite, her ladyship was introducedto them the next day.They were, of course, very anxious to see a person on whom so much oftheir comfort at Barton must depend; and the elegance of her appearancewas favourable to their wishes.  Lady Middleton was not more than sixor seven and twenty; her face was handsome, her figure tall andstriking, and her address graceful.  Her manners had all the elegancewhich her husband's wanted.  But they would have been improved by someshare of his frankness and warmth; and her visit was long enough todetract something from their first admiration, by shewing that, thoughperfectly well-bred, she was reserved, cold, and had nothing to say forherself beyond the most common-place inquiry or remark.Conversation however was not wanted, for Sir John was very chatty, andLady Middleton had taken the wise precaution of bringing with her theireldest child, a fine little boy about six years old, by which meansthere was one subject always to be recurred to by the ladies in case ofextremity, for they had to enquire his name and age, admire his beauty,and ask him questions which his mother answered for him, while he hungabout her and held down his head, to the great surprise of herladyship, who wondered at his being so shy before company, as he couldmake noise enough at home.  On every formal visit a child ought to beof the party, by way of provision for discourse.  In the present caseit took up ten minutes to determine whether the boy were most like hisfather or mother, and in what particular he resembled either, for ofcourse every body differed, and every body was astonished at theopinion of the others.An opportunity was soon to be given to the Dashwoods of debating on therest of the children, as Sir John would not leave the house withoutsecuring their promise of dining at the park the next day.Barton Park was about half a mile from the cottage.  The ladies hadpassed near it in their way along the valley, but it was screened fromtheir view at home by the projection of a hill.  The house was largeand handsome; and the Middletons lived in a style of equal hospitalityand elegance.  The former was for Sir John's gratification, the latterfor that of his lady.  They were scarcely ever without some friendsstaying with them in the house, and they kept more company of everykind than any other family in the neighbourhood.  It was necessary tothe happiness of both; for however dissimilar in temper and outwardbehaviour, they strongly resembled each other in that total want oftalent and taste which confined their employments, unconnected withsuch as society produced, within a very narrow compass.  Sir John was asportsman, Lady Middleton a mother.  He hunted and shot, and shehumoured her children; and these were their only resources.  LadyMiddleton had the advantage of being able to spoil her children all theyear round, while Sir John's independent employments were in existenceonly half the time.  Continual engagements at home and abroad, however,supplied all the deficiencies of nature and education; supported thegood spirits of Sir John, and gave exercise to the good breeding of hiswife.Lady Middleton piqued herself upon the elegance of her table, and ofall her domestic arrangements; and from this kind of vanity was hergreatest enjoyment in any of their parties.  But Sir John'ssatisfaction in society was much more real; he delighted in collectingabout him more young people than his house would hold, and the noisierthey were the better was he pleased.  He was a blessing to all thejuvenile part of the neighbourhood, for in summer he was for everforming parties to eat cold ham and chicken out of doors, and in winterhis private balls were numerous enough for any young lady who was notsuffering under the unsatiable appetite of fifteen.The arrival of a new family in the country was always a matter of joyto him, and in every point of view he was charmed with the inhabitantshe had now procured for his cottage at Barton.  The Miss Dashwoods wereyoung, pretty, and unaffected.  It was enough to secure his goodopinion; for to be unaffected was all that a pretty girl could want tomake her mind as captivating as her person.  The friendliness of hisdisposition made him happy in accommodating those, whose situationmight be considered, in comparison with the past, as unfortunate.  Inshowing kindness to his cousins therefore he had the real satisfactionof a good heart; and in settling a family of females only in hiscottage, he had all the satisfaction of a sportsman; for a sportsman,though he esteems only those of his sex who are sportsmen likewise, isnot often desirous of encouraging their taste by admitting them to aresidence within his own manor.Mrs. Dashwood and her daughters were met at the door of the house bySir John, who welcomed them to Barton Park with unaffected sincerity;and as he attended them to the drawing room repeated to the youngladies the concern which the same subject had drawn from him the daybefore, at being unable to get any smart young men to meet them.  Theywould see, he said, only one gentleman there besides himself; aparticular friend who was staying at the park, but who was neither veryyoung nor very gay.  He hoped they would all excuse the smallness ofthe party, and could assure them it should never happen so again.  Hehad been to several families that morning in hopes of procuring someaddition to their number, but it was moonlight and every body was fullof engagements.  Luckily Lady Middleton's mother had arrived at Bartonwithin the last hour, and as she was a very cheerful agreeable woman,he hoped the young ladies would not find it so very dull as they mightimagine.  The young ladies, as well as their mother, were perfectlysatisfied with having two entire strangers of the party, and wished forno more.Mrs. Jennings, Lady Middleton's mother, was a good-humoured, merry,fat, elderly woman, who talked a great deal, seemed very happy, andrather vulgar.  She was full of jokes and laughter, and before dinnerwas over had said many witty things on the subject of lovers andhusbands; hoped they had not left their hearts behind them in Sussex,and pretended to see them blush whether they did or not.  Marianne wasvexed at it for her sister's sake, and turned her eyes towards Elinorto see how she bore these attacks, with an earnestness which gaveElinor far more pain than could arise from such common-place railleryas Mrs. Jennings's.Colonel Brandon, the friend of Sir John, seemed no more adapted byresemblance of manner to be his friend, than Lady Middleton was to behis wife, or Mrs. Jennings to be Lady Middleton's mother.  He wassilent and grave.  His appearance however was not unpleasing, in spiteof his being in the opinion of Marianne and Margaret an absolute oldbachelor, for he was on the wrong side of five and thirty; but thoughhis face was not handsome, his countenance was sensible, and hisaddress was particularly gentlemanlike.There was nothing in any of the party which could recommend them ascompanions to the Dashwoods; but the cold insipidity of Lady Middletonwas so particularly repulsive, that in comparison of it the gravity ofColonel Brandon, and even the boisterous mirth of Sir John and hismother-in-law was interesting.  Lady Middleton seemed to be roused toenjoyment only by the entrance of her four noisy children after dinner,who pulled her about, tore her clothes, and put an end to every kind ofdiscourse except what related to themselves.In the evening, as Marianne was discovered to be musical, she wasinvited to play.  The instrument was unlocked, every body prepared tobe charmed, and Marianne, who sang very well, at their request wentthrough the chief of the songs which Lady Middleton had brought intothe family on her marriage, and which perhaps had lain ever since inthe same position on the pianoforte, for her ladyship had celebratedthat event by giving up music, although by her mother's account, shehad played extremely well, and by her own was very fond of it.Marianne's performance was highly applauded.  Sir John was loud in hisadmiration at the end of every song, and as loud in his conversationwith the others while every song lasted.  Lady Middleton frequentlycalled him to order, wondered how any one's attention could be divertedfrom music for a moment, and asked Marianne to sing a particular songwhich Marianne had just finished.  Colonel Brandon alone, of all theparty, heard her without being in raptures.  He paid her only thecompliment of attention; and she felt a respect for him on theoccasion, which the others had reasonably forfeited by their shamelesswant of taste.  His pleasure in music, though it amounted not to thatecstatic delight which alone could sympathize with her own, wasestimable when contrasted against the horrible insensibility of theothers; and she was reasonable enough to allow that a man of five andthirty might well have outlived all acuteness of feeling and everyexquisite power of enjoyment.  She was perfectly disposed to make everyallowance for the colonel's advanced state of life which humanityrequired.Mrs. Jennings was a widow with an ample jointure.  She had only twodaughters, both of whom she had lived to see respectably married, andshe had now therefore nothing to do but to marry all the rest of theworld.  In the promotion of this object she was zealously active, asfar as her ability reached; and missed no opportunity of projectingweddings among all the young people of her acquaintance.  She wasremarkably quick in the discovery of attachments, and had enjoyed theadvantage of raising the blushes and the vanity of many a young lady byinsinuations of her power over such a young man; and this kind ofdiscernment enabled her soon after her arrival at Barton decisively topronounce that Colonel Brandon was very much in love with MarianneDashwood.  She rather suspected it to be so, on the very first eveningof their being together, from his listening so attentively while shesang to them; and when the visit was returned by the Middletons' diningat the cottage, the fact was ascertained by his listening to her again.It must be so.  She was perfectly convinced of it.  It would be anexcellent match, for HE was rich, and SHE was handsome.  Mrs. Jenningshad been anxious to see Colonel Brandon well married, ever since herconnection with Sir John first brought him to her knowledge; and shewas always anxious to get a good husband for every pretty girl.The immediate advantage to herself was by no means inconsiderable, forit supplied her with endless jokes against them both.  At the park shelaughed at the colonel, and in the cottage at Marianne.  To the formerher raillery was probably, as far as it regarded only himself,perfectly indifferent; but to the latter it was at firstincomprehensible; and when its object was understood, she hardly knewwhether most to laugh at its absurdity, or censure its impertinence,for she considered it as an unfeeling reflection on the colonel'sadvanced years, and on his forlorn condition as an old bachelor.Mrs. Dashwood, who could not think a man five years younger thanherself, so exceedingly ancient as he appeared to the youthful fancy ofher daughter, ventured to clear Mrs. Jennings from the probability ofwishing to throw ridicule on his age."But at least, Mama, you cannot deny the absurdity of the accusation,though you may not think it intentionally ill-natured.  Colonel Brandonis certainly younger than Mrs. Jennings, but he is old enough to be MYfather; and if he were ever animated enough to be in love, must havelong outlived every sensation of the kind.  It is too ridiculous!  Whenis a man to be safe from such wit, if age and infirmity will notprotect him?""Infirmity!" said Elinor, "do you call Colonel Brandon infirm?  I caneasily suppose that his age may appear much greater to you than to mymother; but you can hardly deceive yourself as to his having the use ofhis limbs!""Did not you hear him complain of the rheumatism?  and is not that thecommonest infirmity of declining life?""My dearest child," said her mother, laughing, "at this rate you mustbe in continual terror of MY decay; and it must seem to you a miraclethat my life has been extended to the advanced age of forty.""Mama, you are not doing me justice.  I know very well that ColonelBrandon is not old enough to make his friends yet apprehensive oflosing him in the course of nature.  He may live twenty years longer.But thirty-five has nothing to do with matrimony.""Perhaps," said Elinor, "thirty-five and seventeen had better not haveany thing to do with matrimony together.  But if there should by anychance happen to be a woman who is single at seven and twenty, I shouldnot think Colonel Brandon's being thirty-five any objection to hismarrying HER.""A woman of seven and twenty," said Marianne, after pausing a moment,"can never hope to feel or inspire affection again, and if her home beuncomfortable, or her fortune small, I can suppose that she might bringherself to submit to the offices of a nurse, for the sake of theprovision and security of a wife.  In his marrying such a womantherefore there would be nothing unsuitable.  It would be a compact ofconvenience, and the world would be satisfied.  In my eyes it would beno marriage at all, but that would be nothing.  To me it would seemonly a commercial exchange, in which each wished to be benefited at theexpense of the other.""It would be impossible, I know," replied Elinor, "to convince you thata woman of seven and twenty could feel for a man of thirty-fiveanything near enough to love, to make him a desirable companion to her.But I must object to your dooming Colonel Brandon and his wife to theconstant confinement of a sick chamber, merely because he chanced tocomplain yesterday (a very cold damp day) of a slight rheumatic feel inone of his shoulders.""But he talked of flannel waistcoats," said Marianne; "and with me aflannel waistcoat is invariably connected with aches, cramps,rheumatisms, and every species of ailment that can afflict the old andthe feeble.""Had he been only in a violent fever, you would not have despised himhalf so much.  Confess, Marianne, is not there something interesting toyou in the flushed cheek, hollow eye, and quick pulse of a fever?"Soon after this, upon Elinor's leaving the room, "Mama," saidMarianne, "I have an alarm on the subject of illness which I cannotconceal from you.  I am sure Edward Ferrars is not well.  We have nowbeen here almost a fortnight, and yet he does not come.  Nothing butreal indisposition could occasion this extraordinary delay.  What elsecan detain him at Norland?""Had you any idea of his coming so soon?" said Mrs. Dashwood.  "I hadnone.  On the contrary, if I have felt any anxiety at all on thesubject, it has been in recollecting that he sometimes showed a want ofpleasure and readiness in accepting my invitation, when I talked of hiscoming to Barton.  Does Elinor expect him already?""I have never mentioned it to her, but of course she must.""I rather think you are mistaken, for when I was talking to heryesterday of getting a new grate for the spare bedchamber, she observedthat there was no immediate hurry for it, as it was not likely that theroom would be wanted for some time.""How strange this is! what can be the meaning of it!  But the whole oftheir behaviour to each other has been unaccountable! How cold, howcomposed were their last adieus! How languid their conversation thelast evening of their being together! In Edward's farewell there was nodistinction between Elinor and me: it was the good wishes of anaffectionate brother to both.  Twice did I leave them purposelytogether in the course of the last morning, and each time did he mostunaccountably follow me out of the room.  And Elinor, in quittingNorland and Edward, cried not as I did.  Even now her self-command isinvariable.  When is she dejected or melancholy? When does she try toavoid society, or appear restless and dissatisfied in it?"The Dashwoods were now settled at Barton with tolerable comfort tothemselves.  The house and the garden, with all the objects surroundingthem, were now become familiar, and the ordinary pursuits which hadgiven to Norland half its charms were engaged in again with far greaterenjoyment than Norland had been able to afford, since the loss of theirfather.  Sir John Middleton, who called on them every day for the firstfortnight, and who was not in the habit of seeing much occupation athome, could not conceal his amazement on finding them always employed.Their visitors, except those from Barton Park, were not many; for, inspite of Sir John's urgent entreaties that they would mix more in theneighbourhood, and repeated assurances of his carriage being always attheir service, the independence of Mrs. Dashwood's spirit overcame thewish of society for her children; and she was resolute in declining tovisit any family beyond the distance of a walk.  There were but few whocould be so classed; and it was not all of them that were attainable.About a mile and a half from the cottage, along the narrow windingvalley of Allenham, which issued from that of Barton, as formerlydescribed, the girls had, in one of their earliest walks, discovered anancient respectable looking mansion which, by reminding them a littleof Norland, interested their imagination and made them wish to bebetter acquainted with it.  But they learnt, on enquiry, that itspossessor, an elderly lady of very good character, was unfortunatelytoo infirm to mix with the world, and never stirred from home.The whole country about them abounded in beautiful walks.  The highdowns which invited them from almost every window of the cottage toseek the exquisite enjoyment of air on their summits, were a happyalternative when the dirt of the valleys beneath shut up their superiorbeauties; and towards one of these hills did Marianne and Margaret onememorable morning direct their steps, attracted by the partial sunshineof a showery sky, and unable longer to bear the confinement which thesettled rain of the two preceding days had occasioned.  The weather wasnot tempting enough to draw the two others from their pencil and theirbook, in spite of Marianne's declaration that the day would belastingly fair, and that every threatening cloud would be drawn offfrom their hills; and the two girls set off together.They gaily ascended the downs, rejoicing in their own penetration atevery glimpse of blue sky; and when they caught in their faces theanimating gales of a high south-westerly wind, they pitied the fearswhich had prevented their mother and Elinor from sharing suchdelightful sensations."Is there a felicity in the world," said Marianne, "superior tothis?--Margaret, we will walk here at least two hours."Margaret agreed, and they pursued their way against the wind, resistingit with laughing delight for about twenty minutes longer, when suddenlythe clouds united over their heads, and a driving rain set full intheir face.-- Chagrined and surprised, they were obliged, thoughunwillingly, to turn back, for no shelter was nearer than their ownhouse.  One consolation however remained for them, to which theexigence of the moment gave more than usual propriety; it was that ofrunning with all possible speed down the steep side of the hill whichled immediately to their garden gate.They set off.  Marianne had at first the advantage, but a false stepbrought her suddenly to the ground; and Margaret, unable to stopherself to assist her, was involuntarily hurried along, and reached thebottom in safety.A gentleman carrying a gun, with two pointers playing round him, waspassing up the hill and within a few yards of Marianne, when heraccident happened.  He put down his gun and ran to her assistance.  Shehad raised herself from the ground, but her foot had been twisted inher fall, and she was scarcely able to stand.  The gentleman offeredhis services; and perceiving that her modesty declined what hersituation rendered necessary, took her up in his arms without fartherdelay, and carried her down the hill.  Then passing through the garden,the gate of which had been left open by Margaret, he bore her directlyinto the house, whither Margaret was just arrived, and quitted not hishold till he had seated her in a chair in the parlour.Elinor and her mother rose up in amazement at their entrance, and whilethe eyes of both were fixed on him with an evident wonder and a secretadmiration which equally sprung from his appearance, he apologized forhis intrusion by relating its cause, in a manner so frank and sograceful that his person, which was uncommonly handsome, receivedadditional charms from his voice and expression.  Had he been even old,ugly, and vulgar, the gratitude and kindness of Mrs. Dashwood wouldhave been secured by any act of attention to her child; but theinfluence of youth, beauty, and elegance, gave an interest to theaction which came home to her feelings.She thanked him again and again; and, with a sweetness of address whichalways attended her, invited him to be seated.  But this he declined,as he was dirty and wet.  Mrs. Dashwood then begged to know to whom shewas obliged.  His name, he replied, was Willoughby, and his presenthome was at Allenham, from whence he hoped she would allow him thehonour of calling tomorrow to enquire after Miss Dashwood.  The honourwas readily granted, and he then departed, to make himself still moreinteresting, in the midst of a heavy rain.His manly beauty and more than common gracefulness were instantly thetheme of general admiration, and the laugh which his gallantry raisedagainst Marianne received particular spirit from his exteriorattractions.-- Marianne herself had seen less of his Mama therest, for the confusion which crimsoned over her face, on his liftingher up, had robbed her of the power of regarding him after theirentering the house.  But she had seen enough of him to join in all theadmiration of the others, and with an energy which always adorned herpraise.  His person and air were equal to what her fancy had ever drawnfor the hero of a favourite story; and in his carrying her into thehouse with so little previous formality, there was a rapidity ofthought which particularly recommended the action to her.  Everycircumstance belonging to him was interesting.  His name was good, hisresidence was in their favourite village, and she soon found out thatof all manly dresses a shooting-jacket was the most becoming.  Herimagination was busy, her reflections were pleasant, and the pain of asprained ankle was disregarded.Sir John called on them as soon as the next interval of fair weatherthat morning allowed him to get out of doors; and Marianne's accidentbeing related to him, he was eagerly asked whether he knew anygentleman of the name of Willoughby at Allenham."Willoughby!" cried Sir John; "what, is HE in the country? That is goodnews however; I will ride over tomorrow, and ask him to dinner onThursday.""You know him then," said Mrs. Dashwood."Know him! to be sure I do.  Why, he is down here every year.""And what sort of a young man is he?""As good a kind of fellow as ever lived, I assure you.  A very decentshot, and there is not a bolder rider in England.""And is that all you can say for him?" cried Marianne, indignantly."But what are his manners on more intimate acquaintance? What hispursuits, his talents, and genius?"Sir John was rather puzzled."Upon my soul," said he, "I do not know much about him as to all THAT.But he is a pleasant, good humoured fellow, and has got the nicestlittle black bitch of a pointer I ever saw.  Was she out with himtoday?"But Marianne could no more satisfy him as to the colour of Mr.Willoughby's pointer, than he could describe to her the shades of hismind."But who is he?" said Elinor.  "Where does he come from?  Has he ahouse at Allenham?"On this point Sir John could give more certain intelligence; and hetold them that Mr. Willoughby had no property of his own in thecountry; that he resided there only while he was visiting the old ladyat Allenham Court, to whom he was related, and whose possessions he wasto inherit; adding, "Yes, yes, he is very well worth catching I cantell you, Miss Dashwood; he has a pretty little estate of his own inSomersetshire besides; and if I were you, I would not give him up to myyounger sister, in spite of all this tumbling down hills.  MissMarianne must not expect to have all the men to herself.  Brandon willbe jealous, if she does not take care.""I do not believe," said Mrs. Dashwood, with a good humoured smile,"that Mr. Willoughby will be incommoded by the attempts of either of MYdaughters towards what you call CATCHING him.  It is not an employmentto which they have been brought up.  Men are very safe with us, letthem be ever so rich.  I am glad to find, however, from what you say,that he is a respectable young man, and one whose acquaintance will notbe ineligible.""He is as good a sort of fellow, I believe, as ever lived," repeatedSir John.  "I remember last Christmas at a little hop at the park, hedanced from eight o'clock till four, without once sitting down.""Did he indeed?" cried Marianne with sparkling eyes, "and withelegance, with spirit?""Yes; and he was up again at eight to ride to covert.""That is what I like; that is what a young man ought to be.  Whateverbe his pursuits, his eagerness in them should know no moderation, andleave him no sense of fatigue.""Aye, aye, I see how it will be," said Sir John, "I see how it will be.You will be setting your cap at him now, and never think of poorBrandon.""That is an expression, Sir John," said Marianne, warmly, "which Iparticularly dislike.  I abhor every common-place phrase by which witis intended; and 'setting one's cap at a man,' or 'making a conquest,'are the most odious of all.  Their tendency is gross and illiberal; andif their construction could ever be deemed clever, time has long agodestroyed all its ingenuity."Sir John did not much understand this reproof; but he laughed asheartily as if he did, and then replied,"Ay, you will make conquests enough, I dare say, one way or other.Poor Brandon! he is quite smitten already, and he is very well worthsetting your cap at, I can tell you, in spite of all this tumblingabout and spraining of ankles."Marianne's preserver, as Margaret, with more elegance than precision,styled Willoughby, called at the cottage early the next morning to makehis personal enquiries.  He was received by Mrs. Dashwood with morethan politeness; with a kindness which Sir John's account of him andher own gratitude prompted; and every thing that passed during thevisit tended to assure him of the sense, elegance, mutual affection,and domestic comfort of the family to whom accident had now introducedhim.  Of their personal charms he had not required a second interviewto be convinced.Miss Dashwood had a delicate complexion, regular features, and aremarkably pretty figure.  Marianne was still handsomer.  Her form,though not so correct as her sister's, in having the advantage ofheight, was more striking; and her face was so lovely, that when in thecommon cant of praise, she was called a beautiful girl, truth was lessviolently outraged than usually happens.  Her skin was very brown, but,from its transparency, her complexion was uncommonly brilliant; herfeatures were all good; her smile was sweet and attractive; and in hereyes, which were very dark, there was a life, a spirit, an eagerness,which could hardily be seen without delight.  From Willoughby theirexpression was at first held back, by the embarrassment which theremembrance of his assistance created.  But when this passed away, whenher spirits became collected, when she saw that to the perfectgood-breeding of the gentleman, he united frankness and vivacity, andabove all, when she heard him declare, that of music and dancing he waspassionately fond, she gave him such a look of approbation as securedthe largest share of his discourse to herself for the rest of his stay.It was only necessary to mention any favourite amusement to engage herto talk.  She could not be silent when such points were introduced, andshe had neither shyness nor reserve in their discussion.  They speedilydiscovered that their enjoyment of dancing and music was mutual, andthat it arose from a general conformity of judgment in all that relatedto either.  Encouraged by this to a further examination of hisopinions, she proceeded to question him on the subject of books; herfavourite authors were brought forward and dwelt upon with so rapturousa delight, that any young man of five and twenty must have beeninsensible indeed, not to become an immediate convert to the excellenceof such works, however disregarded before.  Their taste was strikinglyalike.  The same books, the same passages were idolized by each--or ifany difference appeared, any objection arose, it lasted no longer thantill the force of her arguments and the brightness of her eyes could bedisplayed.  He acquiesced in all her decisions, caught all herenthusiasm; and long before his visit concluded, they conversed withthe familiarity of a long-established acquaintance."Well, Marianne," said Elinor, as soon as he had left them, "for ONEmorning I think you have done pretty well.  You have alreadyascertained Mr. Willoughby's opinion in almost every matter ofimportance.  You know what he thinks of Cowper and Scott; you arecertain of his estimating their beauties as he ought, and you havereceived every assurance of his admiring Pope no more than is proper.But how is your acquaintance to be long supported, under suchextraordinary despatch of every subject for discourse?  You will soonhave exhausted each favourite topic.  Another meeting will suffice toexplain his sentiments on picturesque beauty, and second marriages, andthen you can have nothing farther to ask."--"Elinor," cried Marianne, "is this fair? is this just? are my ideas soscanty?  But I see what you mean.  I have been too much at my ease, toohappy, too frank.  I have erred against every common-place notion ofdecorum; I have been open and sincere where I ought to have beenreserved, spiritless, dull, and deceitful--had I talked only of theweather and the roads, and had I spoken only once in ten minutes, thisreproach would have been spared.""My love," said her mother, "you must not be offended with Elinor--shewas only in jest.  I should scold her myself, if she were capable ofwishing to check the delight of your conversation with our newfriend."-- Marianne was softened in a moment.Willoughby, on his side, gave every proof of his pleasure in theiracquaintance, which an evident wish of improving it could offer.  Hecame to them every day.  To enquire after Marianne was at first hisexcuse; but the encouragement of his reception, to which every day gavegreater kindness, made such an excuse unnecessary before it had ceasedto be possible, by Marianne's perfect recovery.  She was confined forsome days to the house; but never had any confinement been lessirksome.  Willoughby was a young man of good abilities, quickimagination, lively spirits, and open, affectionate manners.  He wasexactly formed to engage Marianne's heart, for with all this, he joinednot only a captivating person, but a natural ardour of mind which wasnow roused and increased by the example of her own, and whichrecommended him to her affection beyond every thing else.His society became gradually her most exquisite enjoyment.  They read,they talked, they sang together; his musical talents were considerable;and he read with all the sensibility and spirit which Edward hadunfortunately wanted.In Mrs. Dashwood's estimation he was as faultless as in Marianne's; andElinor saw nothing to censure in him but a propensity, in which hestrongly resembled and peculiarly delighted her sister, of saying toomuch what he thought on every occasion, without attention to persons orcircumstances.  In hastily forming and giving his opinion of otherpeople, in sacrificing general politeness to the enjoyment of undividedattention where his heart was engaged, and in slighting too easily theforms of worldly propriety, he displayed a want of caution which Elinorcould not approve, in spite of all that he and Marianne could say inits support.Marianne began now to perceive that the desperation which had seizedher at sixteen and a half, of ever seeing a man who could satisfy herideas of perfection, had been rash and unjustifiable.  Willoughby wasall that her fancy had delineated in that unhappy hour and in everybrighter period, as capable of attaching her; and his behaviourdeclared his wishes to be in that respect as earnest, as his abilitieswere strong.Her mother too, in whose mind not one speculative thought of theirmarriage had been raised, by his prospect of riches, was led before theend of a week to hope and expect it; and secretly to congratulateherself on having gained two such sons-in-law as Edward and Willoughby.Colonel Brandon's partiality for Marianne, which had so early beendiscovered by his friends, now first became perceptible to Elinor, whenit ceased to be noticed by them.  Their attention and wit were drawnoff to his more fortunate rival; and the raillery which the other hadincurred before any partiality arose, was removed when his feelingsbegan really to call for the ridicule so justly annexed to sensibility.Elinor was obliged, though unwillingly, to believe that the sentimentswhich Mrs. Jennings had assigned him for her own satisfaction, were nowactually excited by her sister; and that however a general resemblanceof disposition between the parties might forward the affection of Mr.Willoughby, an equally striking opposition of character was nohindrance to the regard of Colonel Brandon.  She saw it with concern;for what could a silent man of five and thirty hope, when opposed to avery lively one of five and twenty? and as she could not even wish himsuccessful, she heartily wished him indifferent.  She liked him--inspite of his gravity and reserve, she beheld in him an object ofinterest.  His manners, though serious, were mild; and his reserveappeared rather the result of some oppression of spirits than of anynatural gloominess of temper.  Sir John had dropped hints of pastinjuries and disappointments, which justified her belief of his beingan unfortunate man, and she regarded him with respect and compassion.Perhaps she pitied and esteemed him the more because he was slighted byWilloughby and Marianne, who, prejudiced against him for being neitherlively nor young, seemed resolved to undervalue his merits."Brandon is just the kind of man," said Willoughby one day, when theywere talking of him together, "whom every body speaks well of, andnobody cares about; whom all are delighted to see, and nobody remembersto talk to.""That is exactly what I think of him," cried Marianne."Do not boast of it, however," said Elinor, "for it is injustice inboth of you.  He is highly esteemed by all the family at the park, andI never see him myself without taking pains to converse with him.""That he is patronised by YOU," replied Willoughby, "is certainly inhis favour; but as for the esteem of the others, it is a reproach initself.  Who would submit to the indignity of being approved by such awoman as Lady Middleton and Mrs. Jennings, that could command theindifference of any body else?""But perhaps the abuse of such people as yourself and Marianne willmake amends for the regard of Lady Middleton and her mother.  If theirpraise is censure, your censure may be praise, for they are not moreundiscerning, than you are prejudiced and unjust.""In defence of your protege you can even be saucy.""My protege, as you call him, is a sensible man; and sense will alwayshave attractions for me.  Yes, Marianne, even in a man between thirtyand forty.  He has seen a great deal of the world; has been abroad, hasread, and has a thinking mind.  I have found him capable of giving memuch information on various subjects; and he has always answered myinquiries with readiness of good-breeding and good nature.""That is to say," cried Marianne contemptuously, "he has told you, thatin the East Indies the climate is hot, and the mosquitoes aretroublesome.""He WOULD have told me so, I doubt not, had I made any such inquiries,but they happened to be points on which I had been previously informed.""Perhaps," said Willoughby, "his observations may have extended to theexistence of nabobs, gold mohrs, and palanquins.""I may venture to say that HIS observations have stretched much furtherthan your candour.  But why should you dislike him?""I do not dislike him.  I consider him, on the contrary, as a veryrespectable man, who has every body's good word, and nobody's notice;who, has more money than he can spend, more time than he knows how toemploy, and two new coats every year.""Add to which," cried Marianne, "that he has neither genius, taste, norspirit.  That his understanding has no brilliancy, his feelings noardour, and his voice no expression.""You decide on his imperfections so much in the mass," replied Elinor,"and so much on the strength of your own imagination, that thecommendation I am able to give of him is comparatively cold andinsipid.  I can only pronounce him to be a sensible man, well-bred,well-informed, of gentle address, and, I believe, possessing an amiableheart.""Miss Dashwood," cried Willoughby, "you are now using me unkindly.  Youare endeavouring to disarm me by reason, and to convince me against mywill.  But it will not do.  You shall find me as stubborn as you can beartful.  I have three unanswerable reasons for disliking ColonelBrandon; he threatened me with rain when I wanted it to be fine; he hasfound fault with the hanging of my curricle, and I cannot persuade himto buy my brown mare.  If it will be any satisfaction to you, however,to be told, that I believe his character to be in other respectsirreproachable, I am ready to confess it.  And in return for anacknowledgment, which must give me some pain, you cannot deny me theprivilege of disliking him as much as ever."Little had Mrs. Dashwood or her daughters imagined when they first cameinto Devonshire, that so many engagements would arise to occupy theirtime as shortly presented themselves, or that they should have suchfrequent invitations and such constant visitors as to leave them littleleisure for serious employment.  Yet such was the case.  When Mariannewas recovered, the schemes of amusement at home and abroad, which SirJohn had been previously forming, were put into execution.  The privateballs at the park then began; and parties on the water were made andaccomplished as often as a showery October would allow.  In everymeeting of the kind Willoughby was included; and the ease andfamiliarity which naturally attended these parties were exactlycalculated to give increasing intimacy to his acquaintance with theDashwoods, to afford him opportunity of witnessing the excellencies ofMarianne, of marking his animated admiration of her, and of receiving,in her behaviour to himself, the most pointed assurance of heraffection.Elinor could not be surprised at their attachment.  She only wishedthat it were less openly shewn; and once or twice did venture tosuggest the propriety of some self-command to Marianne.  But Marianneabhorred all concealment where no real disgrace could attend unreserve;and to aim at the restraint of sentiments which were not in themselvesillaudable, appeared to her not merely an unnecessary effort, but adisgraceful subjection of reason to common-place and mistaken notions.Willoughby thought the same; and their behaviour at all times, was anillustration of their opinions.When he was present she had no eyes for any one else.  Every thing hedid, was right.  Every thing he said, was clever.  If their evenings atthe park were concluded with cards, he cheated himself and all the restof the party to get her a good hand.  If dancing formed the amusementof the night, they were partners for half the time; and when obliged toseparate for a couple of dances, were careful to stand together andscarcely spoke a word to any body else.  Such conduct made them ofcourse most exceedingly laughed at; but ridicule could not shame, andseemed hardly to provoke them.Mrs. Dashwood entered into all their feelings with a warmth which lefther no inclination for checking this excessive display of them.  To herit was but the natural consequence of a strong affection in a young andardent mind.This was the season of happiness to Marianne.  Her heart was devoted toWilloughby, and the fond attachment to Norland, which she brought withher from Sussex, was more likely to be softened than she had thought itpossible before, by the charms which his society bestowed on herpresent home.Elinor's happiness was not so great.  Her heart was not so much atease, nor her satisfaction in their amusements so pure.  They affordedher no companion that could make amends for what she had left behind,nor that could teach her to think of Norland with less regret thanever.  Neither Lady Middleton nor Mrs. Jennings could supply to her theconversation she missed; although the latter was an everlasting talker,and from the first had regarded her with a kindness which ensured her alarge share of her discourse.  She had already repeated her own historyto Elinor three or four times; and had Elinor's memory been equal toher means of improvement, she might have known very early in theiracquaintance all the particulars of Mr. Jennings's last illness, andwhat he said to his wife a few minutes before he died.  Lady Middletonwas more agreeable than her mother only in being more silent.  Elinorneeded little observation to perceive that her reserve was a merecalmness of manner with which sense had nothing to do.  Towards herhusband and mother she was the same as to them; and intimacy wastherefore neither to be looked for nor desired.  She had nothing to sayone day that she had not said the day before.  Her insipidity wasinvariable, for even her spirits were always the same; and though shedid not oppose the parties arranged by her husband, provided everything were conducted in style and her two eldest children attended her,she never appeared to receive more enjoyment from them than she mighthave experienced in sitting at home;--and so little did her presenceadd to the pleasure of the others, by any share in their conversation,that they were sometimes only reminded of her being amongst them by hersolicitude about her troublesome boys.In Colonel Brandon alone, of all her new acquaintance, did Elinor finda person who could in any degree claim the respect of abilities, excitethe interest of friendship, or give pleasure as a companion.Willoughby was out of the question.  Her admiration and regard, evenher sisterly regard, was all his own; but he was a lover; hisattentions were wholly Marianne's, and a far less agreeable man mighthave been more generally pleasing.  Colonel Brandon, unfortunately forhimself, had no such encouragement to think only of Marianne, and inconversing with Elinor he found the greatest consolation for theindifference of her sister.Elinor's compassion for him increased, as she had reason to suspectthat the misery of disappointed love had already been known to him.This suspicion was given by some words which accidentally dropped fromhim one evening at the park, when they were sitting down together bymutual consent, while the others were dancing.  His eyes were fixed onMarianne, and, after a silence of some minutes, he said, with a faintsmile, "Your sister, I understand, does not approve of secondattachments.""No," replied Elinor, "her opinions are all romantic.""Or rather, as I believe, she considers them impossible to exist.""I believe she does.  But how she contrives it without reflecting onthe character of her own father, who had himself two wives, I know not.A few years however will settle her opinions on the reasonable basis ofcommon sense and observation; and then they may be more easy to defineand to justify than they now are, by any body but herself.""This will probably be the case," he replied; "and yet there issomething so amiable in the prejudices of a young mind, that one issorry to see them give way to the reception of more general opinions.""I cannot agree with you there," said Elinor.  "There areinconveniences attending such feelings as Marianne's, which all thecharms of enthusiasm and ignorance of the world cannot atone for.  Hersystems have all the unfortunate tendency of setting propriety atnought; and a better acquaintance with the world is what I look forwardto as her greatest possible advantage."After a short pause he resumed the conversation by saying,--"Does your sister make no distinction in her objections against asecond attachment? or is it equally criminal in every body?  Are thosewho have been disappointed in their first choice, whether from theinconstancy of its object, or the perverseness of circumstances, to beequally indifferent during the rest of their lives?""Upon my word, I am not acquainted with the minutiae of her principles.I only know that I never yet heard her admit any instance of a secondattachment's being pardonable.""This," said he, "cannot hold; but a change, a total change ofsentiments--No, no, do not desire it; for when the romantic refinementsof a young mind are obliged to give way, how frequently are theysucceeded by such opinions as are but too common, and too dangerous!  Ispeak from experience.  I once knew a lady who in temper and mindgreatly resembled your sister, who thought and judged like her, but whofrom an inforced change--from a series of unfortunate circumstances"--Here he stopt suddenly; appeared to think that he had said too much,and by his countenance gave rise to conjectures, which might nototherwise have entered Elinor's head.  The lady would probably havepassed without suspicion, had he not convinced Miss Dashwood that whatconcerned her ought not to escape his lips.  As it was, it required buta slight effort of fancy to connect his emotion with the tenderrecollection of past regard.  Elinor attempted no more.  But Marianne,in her place, would not have done so little.  The whole story wouldhave been speedily formed under her active imagination; and every thingestablished in the most melancholy order of disastrous love.As Elinor and Marianne were walking together the next morning thelatter communicated a piece of news to her sister, which in spite ofall that she knew before of Marianne's imprudence and want of thought,surprised her by its extravagant testimony of both.  Marianne told her,with the greatest delight, that Willoughby had given her a horse, onethat he had bred himself on his estate in Somersetshire, and which wasexactly calculated to carry a woman.  Without considering that it wasnot in her mother's plan to keep any horse, that if she were to alterher resolution in favour of this gift, she must buy another for theservant, and keep a servant to ride it, and after all, build a stableto receive them, she had accepted the present without hesitation, andtold her sister of it in raptures."He intends to send his groom into Somersetshire immediately for it,"she added, "and when it arrives we will ride every day.  You shallshare its use with me.  Imagine to yourself, my dear Elinor, thedelight of a gallop on some of these downs."Most unwilling was she to awaken from such a dream of felicity tocomprehend all the unhappy truths which attended the affair; and forsome time she refused to submit to them.  As to an additional servant,the expense would be a trifle; Mama she was sure would never object toit; and any horse would do for HIM; he might always get one at thepark; as to a stable, the merest shed would be sufficient.  Elinor thenventured to doubt the propriety of her receiving such a present from aman so little, or at least so lately known to her.  This was too much."You are mistaken, Elinor," said she warmly, "in supposing I know verylittle of Willoughby.  I have not known him long indeed, but I am muchbetter acquainted with him, than I am with any other creature in theworld, except yourself and mama.  It is not time or opportunity that isto determine intimacy;--it is disposition alone.  Seven years would beinsufficient to make some people acquainted with each other, and sevendays are more than enough for others.  I should hold myself guilty ofgreater impropriety in accepting a horse from my brother, than fromWilloughby.  Of John I know very little, though we have lived togetherfor years; but of Willoughby my judgment has long been formed."Elinor thought it wisest to touch that point no more.  She knew hersister's temper.  Opposition on so tender a subject would only attachher the more to her own opinion.  But by an appeal to her affection forher mother, by representing the inconveniences which that indulgentmother must draw on herself, if (as would probably be the case) sheconsented to this increase of establishment, Marianne was shortlysubdued; and she promised not to tempt her mother to such imprudentkindness by mentioning the offer, and to tell Willoughby when she sawhim next, that it must be declined.She was faithful to her word; and when Willoughby called at thecottage, the same day, Elinor heard her express her disappointment tohim in a low voice, on being obliged to forego the acceptance of hispresent.  The reasons for this alteration were at the same timerelated, and they were such as to make further entreaty on his sideimpossible.  His concern however was very apparent; and afterexpressing it with earnestness, he added, in the same low voice,--"But,Marianne, the horse is still yours, though you cannot use it now.  Ishall keep it only till you can claim it.  When you leave Barton toform your own establishment in a more lasting home, Queen Mab shallreceive you."This was all overheard by Miss Dashwood; and in the whole of thesentence, in his manner of pronouncing it, and in his addressing hersister by her Christian name alone, she instantly saw an intimacy sodecided, a meaning so direct, as marked a perfect agreement betweenthem.  From that moment she doubted not of their being engaged to eachother; and the belief of it created no other surprise than that she, orany of their friends, should be left by tempers so frank, to discoverit by accident.Margaret related something to her the next day, which placed thismatter in a still clearer light.  Willoughby had spent the precedingevening with them, and Margaret, by being left some time in the parlourwith only him and Marianne, had had opportunity for observations,which, with a most important face, she communicated to her eldestsister, when they were next by themselves."Oh, Elinor!" she cried, "I have such a secret to tell you aboutMarianne.  I am sure she will be married to Mr. Willoughby very soon.""You have said so," replied Elinor, "almost every day since they firstmet on High-church Down; and they had not known each other a week, Ibelieve, before you were certain that Marianne wore his picture roundher neck; but it turned out to be only the miniature of our greatuncle.""But indeed this is quite another thing.  I am sure they will bemarried very soon, for he has got a lock of her hair.""Take care, Margaret.  It may be only the hair of some great uncle ofHIS.""But, indeed, Elinor, it is Marianne's. I am almost sure it is, for Isaw him cut it off.  Last night after tea, when you and mama went outof the room, they were whispering and talking together as fast as couldbe, and he seemed to be begging something of her, and presently he tookup her scissors and cut off a long lock of her hair, for it was alltumbled down her back; and he kissed it, and folded it up in a piece ofwhite paper; and put it into his pocket-book."For such particulars, stated on such authority, Elinor could notwithhold her credit; nor was she disposed to it, for the circumstancewas in perfect unison with what she had heard and seen herself.Margaret's sagacity was not always displayed in a way so satisfactoryto her sister.  When Mrs. Jennings attacked her one evening at thepark, to give the name of the young man who was Elinor's particularfavourite, which had been long a matter of great curiosity to her,Margaret answered by looking at her sister, and saying, "I must nottell, may I, Elinor?"This of course made every body laugh; and Elinor tried to laugh too.But the effort was painful.  She was convinced that Margaret had fixedon a person whose name she could not bear with composure to become astanding joke with Mrs. Jennings.Marianne felt for her most sincerely; but she did more harm than goodto the cause, by turning very red and saying in an angry manner toMargaret,"Remember that whatever your conjectures may be, you have no right torepeat them.""I never had any conjectures about it," replied Margaret; "it was youwho told me of it yourself."This increased the mirth of the company, and Margaret was eagerlypressed to say something more."Oh! pray, Miss Margaret, let us know all about it," said Mrs.Jennings.  "What is the gentleman's name?""I must not tell, ma'am. But I know very well what it is; and I knowwhere he is too.""Yes, yes, we can guess where he is; at his own house at Norland to besure.  He is the curate of the parish I dare say.""No, THAT he is not.  He is of no profession at all.""Margaret," said Marianne with great warmth, "you know that all this isan invention of your own, and that there is no such person inexistence.""Well, then, he is lately dead, Marianne, for I am sure there was sucha man once, and his name begins with an F."Most grateful did Elinor feel to Lady Middleton for observing, at thismoment, "that it rained very hard," though she believed theinterruption to proceed less from any attention to her, than from herladyship's great dislike of all such inelegant subjects of raillery asdelighted her husband and mother.  The idea however started by her, wasimmediately pursued by Colonel Brandon, who was on every occasionmindful of the feelings of others; and much was said on the subject ofrain by both of them.  Willoughby opened the piano-forte, and askedMarianne to sit down to it; and thus amidst the various endeavours ofdifferent people to quit the topic, it fell to the ground.  But not soeasily did Elinor recover from the alarm into which it had thrown her.A party was formed this evening for going on the following day to see avery fine place about twelve miles from Barton, belonging to abrother-in-law of Colonel Brandon, without whose interest it could notbe seen, as the proprietor, who was then abroad, had left strict orderson that head.  The grounds were declared to be highly beautiful, andSir John, who was particularly warm in their praise, might be allowedto be a tolerable judge, for he had formed parties to visit them, atleast, twice every summer for the last ten years.  They contained anoble piece of water; a sail on which was to a form a great part of themorning's amusement; cold provisions were to be taken, open carriagesonly to be employed, and every thing conducted in the usual style of acomplete party of pleasure.To some few of the company it appeared rather a bold undertaking,considering the time of year, and that it had rained every day for thelast fortnight;--and Mrs. Dashwood, who had already a cold, waspersuaded by Elinor to stay at home.Their intended excursion to Whitwell turned out very different fromwhat Elinor had expected.  She was prepared to be wet through,fatigued, and frightened; but the event was still more unfortunate, forthey did not go at all.By ten o'clock the whole party was assembled at the park, where theywere to breakfast.  The morning was rather favourable, though it hadrained all night, as the clouds were then dispersing across the sky,and the sun frequently appeared.  They were all in high spirits andgood humour, eager to be happy, and determined to submit to thegreatest inconveniences and hardships rather than be otherwise.While they were at breakfast the letters were brought in.  Among therest there was one for Colonel Brandon;--he took it, looked at thedirection, changed colour, and immediately left the room."What is the matter with Brandon?" said Sir John.Nobody could tell."I hope he has had no bad news," said Lady Middleton.  "It must besomething extraordinary that could make Colonel Brandon leave mybreakfast table so suddenly."In about five minutes he returned."No bad news, Colonel, I hope;" said Mrs. Jennings, as soon as heentered the room."None at all, ma'am, I thank you.""Was it from Avignon?  I hope it is not to say that your sister isworse.""No, ma'am. It came from town, and is merely a letter of business.""But how came the hand to discompose you so much, if it was only aletter of business?  Come, come, this won't do, Colonel; so let us hearthe truth of it.""My dear madam," said Lady Middleton, "recollect what you are saying.""Perhaps it is to tell you that your cousin Fanny is married?" saidMrs. Jennings, without attending to her daughter's reproof."No, indeed, it is not.""Well, then, I know who it is from, Colonel.  And I hope she is well.""Whom do you mean, ma'am?" said he, colouring a little."Oh! you know who I mean.""I am particularly sorry, ma'am," said he, addressing Lady Middleton,"that I should receive this letter today, for it is on business whichrequires my immediate attendance in town.""In town!" cried Mrs. Jennings.  "What can you have to do in town atthis time of year?""My own loss is great," he continued, "in being obliged to leave soagreeable a party; but I am the more concerned, as I fear my presenceis necessary to gain your admittance at Whitwell."What a blow upon them all was this!"But if you write a note to the housekeeper, Mr. Brandon," saidMarianne, eagerly, "will it not be sufficient?"He shook his head."We must go," said Sir John.--"It shall not be put off when we are sonear it.  You cannot go to town till tomorrow, Brandon, that is all.""I wish it could be so easily settled.  But it is not in my power todelay my journey for one day!""If you would but let us know what your business is," said Mrs.Jennings, "we might see whether it could be put off or not.""You would not be six hours later," said Willoughby, "if you were todefer your journey till our return.""I cannot afford to lose ONE hour."--Elinor then heard Willoughby say, in a low voice to Marianne, "Thereare some people who cannot bear a party of pleasure.  Brandon is one ofthem.  He was afraid of catching cold I dare say, and invented thistrick for getting out of it.  I would lay fifty guineas the letter wasof his own writing.""I have no doubt of it," replied Marianne."There is no persuading you to change your mind, Brandon, I know ofold," said Sir John, "when once you are determined on anything.  But,however, I hope you will think better of it.  Consider, here are thetwo Miss Careys come over from Newton, the three Miss Dashwoods walkedup from the cottage, and Mr. Willoughby got up two hours before hisusual time, on purpose to go to Whitwell."Colonel Brandon again repeated his sorrow at being the cause ofdisappointing the party; but at the same time declared it to beunavoidable."Well, then, when will you come back again?""I hope we shall see you at Barton," added her ladyship, "as soon asyou can conveniently leave town; and we must put off the party toWhitwell till you return.""You are very obliging.  But it is so uncertain, when I may have it inmy power to return, that I dare not engage for it at all.""Oh! he must and shall come back," cried Sir John.  "If he is not hereby the end of the week, I shall go after him.""Ay, so do, Sir John," cried Mrs. Jennings, "and then perhaps you mayfind out what his business is.""I do not want to pry into other men's concerns.  I suppose it issomething he is ashamed of."Colonel Brandon's horses were announced."You do not go to town on horseback, do you?" added Sir John."No. Only to Honiton.  I shall then go post.""Well, as you are resolved to go, I wish you a good journey.  But youhad better change your mind.""I assure you it is not in my power."He then took leave of the whole party."Is there no chance of my seeing you and your sisters in town thiswinter, Miss Dashwood?""I am afraid, none at all.""Then I must bid you farewell for a longer time than I should wish todo."To Marianne, he merely bowed and said nothing."Come Colonel," said Mrs. Jennings, "before you go, do let us know whatyou are going about."He wished her a good morning, and, attended by Sir John, left the room.The complaints and lamentations which politeness had hithertorestrained, now burst forth universally; and they all agreed again andagain how provoking it was to be so disappointed."I can guess what his business is, however," said Mrs. Jenningsexultingly."Can you, ma'am?" said almost every body."Yes; it is about Miss Williams, I am sure.""And who is Miss Williams?" asked Marianne."What! do not you know who Miss Williams is? I am sure you must haveheard of her before.  She is a relation of the Colonel's, my dear; avery near relation.  We will not say how near, for fear of shocking theyoung ladies." Then, lowering her voice a little, she said to Elinor,"She is his natural daughter.""Indeed!""Oh, yes; and as like him as she can stare.  I dare say the Colonelwill leave her all his fortune."When Sir John returned, he joined most heartily in the general regreton so unfortunate an event; concluding however by observing, that asthey were all got together, they must do something by way of beinghappy; and after some consultation it was agreed, that althoughhappiness could only be enjoyed at Whitwell, they might procure atolerable composure of mind by driving about the country.  Thecarriages were then ordered; Willoughby's was first, and Marianne neverlooked happier than when she got into it.  He drove through the parkvery fast, and they were soon out of sight; and nothing more of themwas seen till their return, which did not happen till after the returnof all the rest.  They both seemed delighted with their drive; but saidonly in general terms that they had kept in the lanes, while the otherswent on the downs.It was settled that there should be a dance in the evening, and thatevery body should be extremely merry all day long.  Some more of theCareys came to dinner, and they had the pleasure of sitting down nearlytwenty to table, which Sir John observed with great contentment.Willoughby took his usual place between the two elder Miss Dashwoods.Mrs. Jennings sat on Elinor's right hand; and they had not been longseated, before she leant behind her and Willoughby, and said toMarianne, loud enough for them both to hear, "I have found you out inspite of all your tricks.  I know where you spent the morning."Marianne coloured, and replied very hastily, "Where, pray?"--"Did not you know," said Willoughby, "that we had been out in mycurricle?""Yes, yes, Mr. Impudence, I know that very well, and I was determinedto find out WHERE you had been to.-- I hope you like your house, MissMarianne.  It is a very large one, I know; and when I come to see you,I hope you will have new-furnished it, for it wanted it very much whenI was there six years ago."Marianne turned away in great confusion.  Mrs. Jennings laughedheartily; and Elinor found that in her resolution to know where theyhad been, she had actually made her own woman enquire of Mr.Willoughby's groom; and that she had by that method been informed thatthey had gone to Allenham, and spent a considerable time there inwalking about the garden and going all over the house.Elinor could hardly believe this to be true, as it seemed very unlikelythat Willoughby should propose, or Marianne consent, to enter the housewhile Mrs. Smith was in it, with whom Marianne had not the smallestacquaintance.As soon as they left the dining-room, Elinor enquired of her about it;and great was her surprise when she found that every circumstancerelated by Mrs. Jennings was perfectly true.  Marianne was quite angrywith her for doubting it."Why should you imagine, Elinor, that we did not go there, or that wedid not see the house?  Is not it what you have often wished to doyourself?""Yes, Marianne, but I would not go while Mrs. Smith was there, and withno other companion than Mr. Willoughby.""Mr. Willoughby however is the only person who can have a right to shewthat house; and as he went in an open carriage, it was impossible tohave any other companion.  I never spent a pleasanter morning in mylife.""I am afraid," replied Elinor, "that the pleasantness of an employmentdoes not always evince its propriety.""On the contrary, nothing can be a stronger proof of it, Elinor; for ifthere had been any real impropriety in what I did, I should have beensensible of it at the time, for we always know when we are actingwrong, and with such a conviction I could have had no pleasure.""But, my dear Marianne, as it has already exposed you to some veryimpertinent remarks, do you not now begin to doubt the discretion ofyour own conduct?""If the impertinent remarks of Mrs. Jennings are to be the proof ofimpropriety in conduct, we are all offending every moment of our lives.I value not her censure any more than I should do her commendation.  Iam not sensible of having done anything wrong in walking over Mrs.Smith's grounds, or in seeing her house.  They will one day be Mr.Willoughby's, and--""If they were one day to be your own, Marianne, you would not bejustified in what you have done."She blushed at this hint; but it was even visibly gratifying to her;and after a ten minutes' interval of earnest thought, she came to hersister again, and said with great good humour, "Perhaps, Elinor, it WASrather ill-judged in me to go to Allenham; but Mr. Willoughby wantedparticularly to shew me the place; and it is a charming house, I assureyou.--There is one remarkably pretty sitting room up stairs; of a nicecomfortable size for constant use, and with modern furniture it wouldbe delightful.  It is a corner room, and has windows on two sides.  Onone side you look across the bowling-green, behind the house, to abeautiful hanging wood, and on the other you have a view of the churchand village, and, beyond them, of those fine bold hills that we have sooften admired.  I did not see it to advantage, for nothing could bemore forlorn than the furniture,--but if it were newly fitted up--acouple of hundred pounds, Willoughby says, would make it one of thepleasantest summer-rooms in England."Could Elinor have listened to her without interruption from the others,she would have described every room in the house with equal delight.The sudden termination of Colonel Brandon's visit at the park, with hissteadiness in concealing its cause, filled the mind, and raised thewonder of Mrs. Jennings for two or three days; she was a greatwonderer, as every one must be who takes a very lively interest in allthe comings and goings of all their acquaintance.  She wondered, withlittle intermission what could be the reason of it; was sure there mustbe some bad news, and thought over every kind of distress that couldhave befallen him, with a fixed determination that he should not escapethem all."Something very melancholy must be the matter, I am sure," said she."I could see it in his face.  Poor man!  I am afraid his circumstancesmay be bad.  The estate at Delaford was never reckoned more than twothousand a year, and his brother left everything sadly involved.  I dothink he must have been sent for about money matters, for what else canit be?  I wonder whether it is so.  I would give anything to know thetruth of it.  Perhaps it is about Miss Williams and, by the bye, I daresay it is, because he looked so conscious when I mentioned her.  May beshe is ill in town; nothing in the world more likely, for I have anotion she is always rather sickly.  I would lay any wager it is aboutMiss Williams.  It is not so very likely he should be distressed in hiscircumstances NOW, for he is a very prudent man, and to be sure musthave cleared the estate by this time.  I wonder what it can be!  May behis sister is worse at Avignon, and has sent for him over.  His settingoff in such a hurry seems very like it.  Well, I wish him out of allhis trouble with all my heart, and a good wife into the bargain."So wondered, so talked Mrs. Jennings.  Her opinion varying with everyfresh conjecture, and all seeming equally probable as they arose.Elinor, though she felt really interested in the welfare of ColonelBrandon, could not bestow all the wonder on his going so suddenly away,which Mrs. Jennings was desirous of her feeling; for besides that thecircumstance did not in her opinion justify such lasting amazement orvariety of speculation, her wonder was otherwise disposed of.  It wasengrossed by the extraordinary silence of her sister and Willoughby onthe subject, which they must know to be peculiarly interesting to themall.  As this silence continued, every day made it appear more strangeand more incompatible with the disposition of both.  Why they shouldnot openly acknowledge to her mother and herself, what their constantbehaviour to each other declared to have taken place, Elinor could notimagine.She could easily conceive that marriage might not be immediately intheir power; for though Willoughby was independent, there was no reasonto believe him rich.  His estate had been rated by Sir John at aboutsix or seven hundred a year; but he lived at an expense to which thatincome could hardly be equal, and he had himself often complained ofhis poverty.  But for this strange kind of secrecy maintained by themrelative to their engagement, which in fact concealed nothing at all,she could not account; and it was so wholly contradictory to theirgeneral opinions and practice, that a doubt sometimes entered her mindof their being really engaged, and this doubt was enough to prevent hermaking any inquiry of Marianne.Nothing could be more expressive of attachment to them all, thanWilloughby's behaviour.  To Marianne it had all the distinguishingtenderness which a lover's heart could give, and to the rest of thefamily it was the affectionate attention of a son and a brother.  Thecottage seemed to be considered and loved by him as his home; many moreof his hours were spent there than at Allenham; and if no generalengagement collected them at the park, the exercise which called himout in the morning was almost certain of ending there, where the restof the day was spent by himself at the side of Marianne, and by hisfavourite pointer at her feet.One evening in particular, about a week after Colonel Brandon left thecountry, his heart seemed more than usually open to every feeling ofattachment to the objects around him; and on Mrs. Dashwood's happeningto mention her design of improving the cottage in the spring, he warmlyopposed every alteration of a place which affection had established asperfect with him."What!" he exclaimed--"Improve this dear cottage!  No. THAT I willnever consent to.  Not a stone must be added to its walls, not an inchto its size, if my feelings are regarded.""Do not be alarmed," said Miss Dashwood, "nothing of the kind will bedone; for my mother will never have money enough to attempt it.""I am heartily glad of it," he cried.  "May she always be poor, if shecan employ her riches no better.""Thank you, Willoughby.  But you may be assured that I would notsacrifice one sentiment of local attachment of yours, or of any onewhom I loved, for all the improvements in the world.  Depend upon itthat whatever unemployed sum may remain, when I make up my accounts inthe spring, I would even rather lay it uselessly by than dispose of itin a manner so painful to you.  But are you really so attached to thisplace as to see no defect in it?""I am," said he.  "To me it is faultless.  Nay, more, I consider it asthe only form of building in which happiness is attainable, and were Irich enough I would instantly pull Combe down, and build it up again inthe exact plan of this cottage.""With dark narrow stairs and a kitchen that smokes, I suppose," saidElinor."Yes," cried he in the same eager tone, "with all and every thingbelonging to it;--in no one convenience or INconvenience about it,should the least variation be perceptible.  Then, and then only, undersuch a roof, I might perhaps be as happy at Combe as I have been atBarton.""I flatter myself," replied Elinor, "that even under the disadvantageof better rooms and a broader staircase, you will hereafter find yourown house as faultless as you now do this.""There certainly are circumstances," said Willoughby, "which mightgreatly endear it to me; but this place will always have one claim ofmy affection, which no other can possibly share."Mrs. Dashwood looked with pleasure at Marianne, whose fine eyes werefixed so expressively on Willoughby, as plainly denoted how well sheunderstood him."How often did I wish," added he, "when I was at Allenham this timetwelvemonth, that Barton cottage were inhabited!  I never passed withinview of it without admiring its situation, and grieving that no oneshould live in it.  How little did I then think that the very firstnews I should hear from Mrs. Smith, when I next came into the country,would be that Barton cottage was taken: and I felt an immediatesatisfaction and interest in the event, which nothing but a kind ofprescience of what happiness I should experience from it, can accountfor.  Must it not have been so, Marianne?" speaking to her in a loweredvoice.  Then continuing his former tone, he said, "And yet this houseyou would spoil, Mrs. Dashwood?  You would rob it of its simplicity byimaginary improvement! and this dear parlour in which our acquaintancefirst began, and in which so many happy hours have been since spent byus together, you would degrade to the condition of a common entrance,and every body would be eager to pass through the room which hashitherto contained within itself more real accommodation and comfortthan any other apartment of the handsomest dimensions in the worldcould possibly afford."Mrs. Dashwood again assured him that no alteration of the kind shouldbe attempted."You are a good woman," he warmly replied.  "Your promise makes meeasy.  Extend it a little farther, and it will make me happy.  Tell methat not only your house will remain the same, but that I shall everfind you and yours as unchanged as your dwelling; and that you willalways consider me with the kindness which has made everythingbelonging to you so dear to me."The promise was readily given, and Willoughby's behaviour during thewhole of the evening declared at once his affection and happiness."Shall we see you tomorrow to dinner?" said Mrs. Dashwood, when he wasleaving them.  "I do not ask you to come in the morning, for we mustwalk to the park, to call on Lady Middleton."He engaged to be with them by four o'clock.Mrs. Dashwood's visit to Lady Middleton took place the next day, andtwo of her daughters went with her; but Marianne excused herself frombeing of the party, under some trifling pretext of employment; and hermother, who concluded that a promise had been made by Willoughby thenight before of calling on her while they were absent, was perfectlysatisfied with her remaining at home.On their return from the park they found Willoughby's curricle andservant in waiting at the cottage, and Mrs. Dashwood was convinced thather conjecture had been just.  So far it was all as she had foreseen;but on entering the house she beheld what no foresight had taught herto expect.  They were no sooner in the passage than Marianne camehastily out of the parlour apparently in violent affliction, with herhandkerchief at her eyes; and without noticing them ran up stairs.Surprised and alarmed they proceeded directly into the room she hadjust quitted, where they found only Willoughby, who was leaning againstthe mantel-piece with his back towards them.  He turned round on theircoming in, and his countenance shewed that he strongly partook of theemotion which over-powered Marianne."Is anything the matter with her?" cried Mrs. Dashwood as sheentered--"is she ill?""I hope not," he replied, trying to look cheerful; and with a forcedsmile presently added, "It is I who may rather expect to be ill--for Iam now suffering under a very heavy disappointment!""Disappointment?""Yes, for I am unable to keep my engagement with you.  Mrs. Smith hasthis morning exercised the privilege of riches upon a poor dependentcousin, by sending me on business to London.  I have just received mydispatches, and taken my farewell of Allenham; and by way ofexhilaration I am now come to take my farewell of you.""To London!--and are you going this morning?""Almost this moment.""This is very unfortunate.  But Mrs. Smith must be obliged;--and herbusiness will not detain you from us long I hope."He coloured as he replied, "You are very kind, but I have no idea ofreturning into Devonshire immediately.  My visits to Mrs. Smith arenever repeated within the twelvemonth.""And is Mrs. Smith your only friend?  Is Allenham the only house in theneighbourhood to which you will be welcome?  For shame, Willoughby, canyou wait for an invitation here?"His colour increased; and with his eyes fixed on the ground he onlyreplied, "You are too good."Mrs. Dashwood looked at Elinor with surprise.  Elinor felt equalamazement.  For a few moments every one was silent.  Mrs. Dashwoodfirst spoke."I have only to add, my dear Willoughby, that at Barton cottage youwill always be welcome; for I will not press you to return hereimmediately, because you only can judge how far THAT might be pleasingto Mrs. Smith; and on this head I shall be no more disposed to questionyour judgment than to doubt your inclination.""My engagements at present," replied Willoughby, confusedly, "are ofsuch a nature--that--I dare not flatter myself"--He stopt.  Mrs. Dashwood was too much astonished to speak, and anotherpause succeeded.  This was broken by Willoughby, who said with a faintsmile, "It is folly to linger in this manner.  I will not tormentmyself any longer by remaining among friends whose society it isimpossible for me now to enjoy."He then hastily took leave of them all and left the room.  They saw himstep into his carriage, and in a minute it was out of sight.Mrs. Dashwood felt too much for speech, and instantly quitted theparlour to give way in solitude to the concern and alarm which thissudden departure occasioned.Elinor's uneasiness was at least equal to her mother's.  She thought ofwhat had just passed with anxiety and distrust.  Willoughby's behaviourin taking leave of them, his embarrassment, and affectation ofcheerfulness, and, above all, his unwillingness to accept her mother'sinvitation, a backwardness so unlike a lover, so unlike himself,greatly disturbed her.  One moment she feared that no serious designhad ever been formed on his side; and the next that some unfortunatequarrel had taken place between him and her sister;--the distress inwhich Marianne had quitted the room was such as a serious quarrel couldmost reasonably account for, though when she considered what Marianne'slove for him was, a quarrel seemed almost impossible.But whatever might be the particulars of their separation, her sister'saffliction was indubitable; and she thought with the tenderestcompassion of that violent sorrow which Marianne was in all probabilitynot merely giving way to as a relief, but feeding and encouraging as aduty.In about half an hour her mother returned, and though her eyes werered, her countenance was not uncheerful."Our dear Willoughby is now some miles from Barton, Elinor," said she,as she sat down to work, "and with how heavy a heart does he travel?""It is all very strange.  So suddenly to be gone! It seems but the workof a moment.  And last night he was with us so happy, so cheerful, soaffectionate?  And now, after only ten minutes notice--Gone too withoutintending to return!--Something more than what he owned to us must havehappened.  He did not speak, he did not behave like himself.  YOU musthave seen the difference as well as I.  What can it be?  Can they havequarrelled?  Why else should he have shewn such unwillingness to acceptyour invitation here?"--"It was not inclination that he wanted, Elinor; I could plainly seeTHAT.  He had not the power of accepting it.  I have thought it allover I assure you, and I can perfectly account for every thing that atfirst seemed strange to me as well as to you.""Can you, indeed!""Yes. I have explained it to myself in the most satisfactory way;--butyou, Elinor, who love to doubt where you can--it will not satisfy YOU,I know; but you shall not talk ME out of my trust in it.  I ampersuaded that Mrs. Smith suspects his regard for Marianne, disapprovesof it, (perhaps because she has other views for him,) and on thataccount is eager to get him away;--and that the business which shesends him off to transact is invented as an excuse to dismiss him.This is what I believe to have happened.  He is, moreover, aware thatshe DOES disapprove the connection, he dares not therefore at presentconfess to her his engagement with Marianne, and he feels himselfobliged, from his dependent situation, to give into her schemes, andabsent himself from Devonshire for a while.  You will tell me, I know,that this may or may NOT have happened; but I will listen to no cavil,unless you can point out any other method of understanding the affairas satisfactory at this.  And now, Elinor, what have you to say?""Nothing, for you have anticipated my answer.""Then you would have told me, that it might or might not have happened.Oh, Elinor, how incomprehensible are your feelings!  You had rathertake evil upon credit than good.  You had rather look out for miseryfor Marianne, and guilt for poor Willoughby, than an apology for thelatter.  You are resolved to think him blameable, because he took leaveof us with less affection than his usual behaviour has shewn.  And isno allowance to be made for inadvertence, or for spirits depressed byrecent disappointment?  Are no probabilities to be accepted, merelybecause they are not certainties?  Is nothing due to the man whom wehave all such reason to love, and no reason in the world to think illof?  To the possibility of motives unanswerable in themselves, thoughunavoidably secret for a while?  And, after all, what is it you suspecthim of?""I can hardly tell myself.  But suspicion of something unpleasant isthe inevitable consequence of such an alteration as we just witnessedin him.  There is great truth, however, in what you have now urged ofthe allowances which ought to be made for him, and it is my wish to becandid in my judgment of every body.  Willoughby may undoubtedly havevery sufficient reasons for his conduct, and I will hope that he has.But it would have been more like Willoughby to acknowledge them atonce.  Secrecy may be advisable; but still I cannot help wondering atits being practiced by him.""Do not blame him, however, for departing from his character, where thedeviation is necessary.  But you really do admit the justice of what Ihave said in his defence?--I am happy--and he is acquitted.""Not entirely.  It may be proper to conceal their engagement (if theyARE engaged) from Mrs. Smith--and if that is the case, it must behighly expedient for Willoughby to be but little in Devonshire atpresent.  But this is no excuse for their concealing it from us.""Concealing it from us! my dear child, do you accuse Willoughby andMarianne of concealment? This is strange indeed, when your eyes havebeen reproaching them every day for incautiousness.""I want no proof of their affection," said Elinor; "but of theirengagement I do.""I am perfectly satisfied of both.""Yet not a syllable has been said to you on the subject, by either ofthem.""I have not wanted syllables where actions have spoken so plainly.  Hasnot his behaviour to Marianne and to all of us, for at least the lastfortnight, declared that he loved and considered her as his futurewife, and that he felt for us the attachment of the nearest relation?Have we not perfectly understood each other?  Has not my consent beendaily asked by his looks, his manner, his attentive and affectionaterespect?  My Elinor, is it possible to doubt their engagement?  Howcould such a thought occur to you?  How is it to be supposed thatWilloughby, persuaded as he must be of your sister's love, should leaveher, and leave her perhaps for months, without telling her of hisaffection;--that they should part without a mutual exchange ofconfidence?""I confess," replied Elinor, "that every circumstance except ONE is infavour of their engagement; but that ONE is the total silence of bothon the subject, and with me it almost outweighs every other.""How strange this is!  You must think wretchedly indeed of Willoughby,if, after all that has openly passed between them, you can doubt thenature of the terms on which they are together.  Has he been acting apart in his behaviour to your sister all this time?  Do you suppose himreally indifferent to her?""No, I cannot think that.  He must and does love her I am sure.""But with a strange kind of tenderness, if he can leave her with suchindifference, such carelessness of the future, as you attribute to him.""You must remember, my dear mother, that I have never considered thismatter as certain.  I have had my doubts, I confess; but they arefainter than they were, and they may soon be entirely done away.  If wefind they correspond, every fear of mine will be removed.""A mighty concession indeed!  If you were to see them at the altar, youwould suppose they were going to be married.  Ungracious girl!  But Irequire no such proof.  Nothing in my opinion has ever passed tojustify doubt; no secrecy has been attempted; all has been uniformlyopen and unreserved.  You cannot doubt your sister's wishes.  It mustbe Willoughby therefore whom you suspect.  But why?  Is he not a man ofhonour and feeling? Has there been any inconsistency on his side tocreate alarm? can he be deceitful?""I hope not, I believe not," cried Elinor.  "I love Willoughby,sincerely love him; and suspicion of his integrity cannot be morepainful to yourself than to me.  It has been involuntary, and I willnot encourage it.  I was startled, I confess, by the alteration in hismanners this morning;--he did not speak like himself, and did notreturn your kindness with any cordiality.  But all this may beexplained by such a situation of his affairs as you have supposed.  Hehad just parted from my sister, had seen her leave him in the greatestaffliction; and if he felt obliged, from a fear of offending Mrs.Smith, to resist the temptation of returning here soon, and yet awarethat by declining your invitation, by saying that he was going away forsome time, he should seem to act an ungenerous, a suspicious part byour family, he might well be embarrassed and disturbed.  In such acase, a plain and open avowal of his difficulties would have been moreto his honour I think, as well as more consistent with his generalcharacter;--but I will not raise objections against any one's conducton so illiberal a foundation, as a difference in judgment from myself,or a deviation from what I may think right and consistent.""You speak very properly.  Willoughby certainly does not deserve to besuspected.  Though WE have not known him long, he is no stranger inthis part of the world; and who has ever spoken to his disadvantage?Had he been in a situation to act independently and marry immediately,it might have been odd that he should leave us without acknowledgingeverything to me at once: but this is not the case.  It is anengagement in some respects not prosperously begun, for their marriagemust be at a very uncertain distance; and even secrecy, as far as itcan be observed, may now be very advisable."They were interrupted by the entrance of Margaret; and Elinor was thenat liberty to think over the representations of her mother, toacknowledge the probability of many, and hope for the justice of all.They saw nothing of Marianne till dinner time, when she entered theroom and took her place at the table without saying a word.  Her eyeswere red and swollen; and it seemed as if her tears were even thenrestrained with difficulty.  She avoided the looks of them all, couldneither eat nor speak, and after some time, on her mother's silentlypressing her hand with tender compassion, her small degree of fortitudewas quite overcome, she burst into tears and left the room.This violent oppression of spirits continued the whole evening.  Shewas without any power, because she was without any desire of commandover herself.  The slightest mention of anything relative to Willoughbyoverpowered her in an instant; and though her family were mostanxiously attentive to her comfort, it was impossible for them, if theyspoke at all, to keep clear of every subject which her feelingsconnected with him.Marianne would have thought herself very inexcusable had she been ableto sleep at all the first night after parting from Willoughby.  Shewould have been ashamed to look her family in the face the nextmorning, had she not risen from her bed in more need of repose thanwhen she lay down in it.  But the feelings which made such composure adisgrace, left her in no danger of incurring it.  She was awake thewhole night, and she wept the greatest part of it.  She got up with aheadache, was unable to talk, and unwilling to take any nourishment;giving pain every moment to her mother and sisters, and forbidding allattempt at consolation from either.  Her sensibility was potent enough!When breakfast was over she walked out by herself, and wandered aboutthe village of Allenham, indulging the recollection of past enjoymentand crying over the present reverse for the chief of the morning.The evening passed off in the equal indulgence of feeling.  She playedover every favourite song that she had been used to play to Willoughby,every air in which their voices had been oftenest joined, and sat atthe instrument gazing on every line of music that he had written outfor her, till her heart was so heavy that no farther sadness could begained; and this nourishment of grief was every day applied.  She spentwhole hours at the pianoforte alternately singing and crying; her voiceoften totally suspended by her tears.  In books too, as well as inmusic, she courted the misery which a contrast between the past andpresent was certain of giving.  She read nothing but what they had beenused to read together.Such violence of affliction indeed could not be supported for ever; itsunk within a few days into a calmer melancholy; but these employments,to which she daily recurred, her solitary walks and silent meditations,still produced occasional effusions of sorrow as lively as ever.No letter from Willoughby came; and none seemed expected by Marianne.Her mother was surprised, and Elinor again became uneasy.  But Mrs.Dashwood could find explanations whenever she wanted them, which atleast satisfied herself."Remember, Elinor," said she, "how very often Sir John fetches ourletters himself from the post, and carries them to it.  We have alreadyagreed that secrecy may be necessary, and we must acknowledge that itcould not be maintained if their correspondence were to pass throughSir John's hands."Elinor could not deny the truth of this, and she tried to find in it amotive sufficient for their silence.  But there was one method sodirect, so simple, and in her opinion so eligible of knowing the realstate of the affair, and of instantly removing all mystery, that shecould not help suggesting it to her mother."Why do you not ask Marianne at once," said she, "whether she is or sheis not engaged to Willoughby?  From you, her mother, and so kind, soindulgent a mother, the question could not give offence.  It would bethe natural result of your affection for her.  She used to be allunreserve, and to you more especially.""I would not ask such a question for the world.  Supposing it possiblethat they are not engaged, what distress would not such an enquiryinflict!  At any rate it would be most ungenerous.  I should neverdeserve her confidence again, after forcing from her a confession ofwhat is meant at present to be unacknowledged to any one.  I knowMarianne's heart: I know that she dearly loves me, and that I shall notbe the last to whom the affair is made known, when circumstances makethe revealment of it eligible.  I would not attempt to force theconfidence of any one; of a child much less; because a sense of dutywould prevent the denial which her wishes might direct."Elinor thought this generosity overstrained, considering her sister'syouth, and urged the matter farther, but in vain; common sense, commoncare, common prudence, were all sunk in Mrs. Dashwood's romanticdelicacy.It was several days before Willoughby's name was mentioned beforeMarianne by any of her family; Sir John and Mrs. Jennings, indeed, werenot so nice; their witticisms added pain to many a painful hour;--butone evening, Mrs. Dashwood, accidentally taking up a volume ofShakespeare, exclaimed,"We have never finished Hamlet, Marianne; our dear Willoughby went awaybefore we could get through it.  We will put it by, that when he comesagain...But it may be months, perhaps, before THAT happens.""Months!" cried Marianne, with strong surprise.  "No--nor many weeks."Mrs. Dashwood was sorry for what she had said; but it gave Elinorpleasure, as it produced a reply from Marianne so expressive ofconfidence in Willoughby and knowledge of his intentions.One morning, about a week after his leaving the country, Marianne wasprevailed on to join her sisters in their usual walk, instead ofwandering away by herself.  Hitherto she had carefully avoided everycompanion in her rambles.  If her sisters intended to walk on thedowns, she directly stole away towards the lanes; if they talked of thevalley, she was as speedy in climbing the hills, and could never befound when the others set off.  But at length she was secured by theexertions of Elinor, who greatly disapproved such continual seclusion.They walked along the road through the valley, and chiefly in silence,for Marianne's MIND could not be controlled, and Elinor, satisfied withgaining one point, would not then attempt more.  Beyond the entrance ofthe valley, where the country, though still rich, was less wild andmore open, a long stretch of the road which they had travelled on firstcoming to Barton, lay before them; and on reaching that point, theystopped to look around them, and examine a prospect which formed thedistance of their view from the cottage, from a spot which they hadnever happened to reach in any of their walks before.Amongst the objects in the scene, they soon discovered an animated one;it was a man on horseback riding towards them.  In a few minutes theycould distinguish him to be a gentleman; and in a moment afterwardsMarianne rapturously exclaimed,"It is he; it is indeed;--I know it is!"--and was hastening to meethim, when Elinor cried out,"Indeed, Marianne, I think you are mistaken.  It is not Willoughby.The person is not tall enough for him, and has not his air.""He has, he has," cried Marianne, "I am sure he has.  His air, hiscoat, his horse.  I knew how soon he would come."She walked eagerly on as she spoke; and Elinor, to screen Marianne fromparticularity, as she felt almost certain of its not being Willoughby,quickened her pace and kept up with her.  They were soon within thirtyyards of the gentleman.  Marianne looked again; her heart sunk withinher; and abruptly turning round, she was hurrying back, when the voicesof both her sisters were raised to detain her; a third, almost as wellknown as Willoughby's, joined them in begging her to stop, and sheturned round with surprise to see and welcome Edward Ferrars.He was the only person in the world who could at that moment beforgiven for not being Willoughby; the only one who could have gained asmile from her; but she dispersed her tears to smile on HIM, and in hersister's happiness forgot for a time her own disappointment.He dismounted, and giving his horse to his servant, walked back withthem to Barton, whither he was purposely coming to visit them.He was welcomed by them all with great cordiality, but especially byMarianne, who showed more warmth of regard in her reception of him thaneven Elinor herself.  To Marianne, indeed, the meeting between Edwardand her sister was but a continuation of that unaccountable coldnesswhich she had often observed at Norland in their mutual behaviour.  OnEdward's side, more particularly, there was a deficiency of all that alover ought to look and say on such an occasion.  He was confused,seemed scarcely sensible of pleasure in seeing them, looked neitherrapturous nor gay, said little but what was forced from him byquestions, and distinguished Elinor by no mark of affection.  Mariannesaw and listened with increasing surprise.  She began almost to feel adislike of Edward; and it ended, as every feeling must end with her, bycarrying back her thoughts to Willoughby, whose manners formed acontrast sufficiently striking to those of his brother elect.After a short silence which succeeded the first surprise and enquiriesof meeting, Marianne asked Edward if he came directly from London.  No,he had been in Devonshire a fortnight."A fortnight!" she repeated, surprised at his being so long in the samecounty with Elinor without seeing her before.He looked rather distressed as he added, that he had been staying withsome friends near Plymouth."Have you been lately in Sussex?" said Elinor."I was at Norland about a month ago.""And how does dear, dear Norland look?" cried Marianne."Dear, dear Norland," said Elinor, "probably looks much as it alwaysdoes at this time of the year.  The woods and walks thickly coveredwith dead leaves.""Oh," cried Marianne, "with what transporting sensation have I formerlyseen them fall!  How have I delighted, as I walked, to see them drivenin showers about me by the wind!  What feelings have they, the season,the air altogether inspired!  Now there is no one to regard them.  Theyare seen only as a nuisance, swept hastily off, and driven as much aspossible from the sight.""It is not every one," said Elinor, "who has your passion for deadleaves.""No; my feelings are not often shared, not often understood.  ButSOMETIMES they are."--As she said this, she sunk into a reverie for afew moments;--but rousing herself again, "Now, Edward," said she,calling his attention to the prospect, "here is Barton valley.  Look upto it, and be tranquil if you can.  Look at those hills!  Did you eversee their equals?  To the left is Barton park, amongst those woods andplantations.  You may see the end of the house.  And there, beneaththat farthest hill, which rises with such grandeur, is our cottage.""It is a beautiful country," he replied; "but these bottoms must bedirty in winter.""How can you think of dirt, with such objects before you?""Because," replied he, smiling, "among the rest of the objects beforeme, I see a very dirty lane.""How strange!" said Marianne to herself as she walked on."Have you an agreeable neighbourhood here?  Are the Middletons pleasantpeople?""No, not all," answered Marianne; "we could not be more unfortunatelysituated.""Marianne," cried her sister, "how can you say so? How can you be sounjust?  They are a very respectable family, Mr. Ferrars; and towardsus have behaved in the friendliest manner.  Have you forgot, Marianne,how many pleasant days we have owed to them?""No," said Marianne, in a low voice, "nor how many painful moments."Elinor took no notice of this; and directing her attention to theirvisitor, endeavoured to support something like discourse with him, bytalking of their present residence, its conveniences, &c. extortingfrom him occasional questions and remarks.  His coldness and reservemortified her severely; she was vexed and half angry; but resolving toregulate her behaviour to him by the past rather than the present, sheavoided every appearance of resentment or displeasure, and treated himas she thought he ought to be treated from the family connection.Mrs. Dashwood was surprised only for a moment at seeing him; for hiscoming to Barton was, in her opinion, of all things the most natural.Her joy and expression of regard long outlived her wonder.  He receivedthe kindest welcome from her; and shyness, coldness, reserve could notstand against such a reception.  They had begun to fail him before heentered the house, and they were quite overcome by the captivatingmanners of Mrs. Dashwood.  Indeed a man could not very well be in lovewith either of her daughters, without extending the passion to her; andElinor had the satisfaction of seeing him soon become more likehimself.  His affections seemed to reanimate towards them all, and hisinterest in their welfare again became perceptible.  He was not inspirits, however; he praised their house, admired its prospect, wasattentive, and kind; but still he was not in spirits.  The whole familyperceived it, and Mrs. Dashwood, attributing it to some want ofliberality in his mother, sat down to table indignant against allselfish parents."What are Mrs. Ferrars's views for you at present, Edward?" said she,when dinner was over and they had drawn round the fire; "are you stillto be a great orator in spite of yourself?""No. I hope my mother is now convinced that I have no more talents thaninclination for a public life!""But how is your fame to be established? for famous you must be tosatisfy all your family; and with no inclination for expense, noaffection for strangers, no profession, and no assurance, you may findit a difficult matter.""I shall not attempt it.  I have no wish to be distinguished; and haveevery reason to hope I never shall.  Thank Heaven! I cannot be forcedinto genius and eloquence.""You have no ambition, I well know.  Your wishes are all moderate.""As moderate as those of the rest of the world, I believe.  I wish aswell as every body else to be perfectly happy; but, like every bodyelse it must be in my own way.  Greatness will not make me so.""Strange that it would!" cried Marianne.  "What have wealth or grandeurto do with happiness?""Grandeur has but little," said Elinor, "but wealth has much to do withit.""Elinor, for shame!" said Marianne, "money can only give happinesswhere there is nothing else to give it.  Beyond a competence, it canafford no real satisfaction, as far as mere self is concerned.""Perhaps," said Elinor, smiling, "we may come to the same point.  YOURcompetence and MY wealth are very much alike, I dare say; and withoutthem, as the world goes now, we shall both agree that every kind ofexternal comfort must be wanting.  Your ideas are only more noble thanmine.  Come, what is your competence?""About eighteen hundred or two thousand a year; not more than THAT."Elinor laughed.  "TWO thousand a year! ONE is my wealth! I guessed howit would end.""And yet two thousand a-year is a very moderate income," said Marianne."A family cannot well be maintained on a smaller.  I am sure I am notextravagant in my demands.  A proper establishment of servants, acarriage, perhaps two, and hunters, cannot be supported on less."Elinor smiled again, to hear her sister describing so accurately theirfuture expenses at Combe Magna."Hunters!" repeated Edward--"but why must you have hunters?  Every bodydoes not hunt."Marianne coloured as she replied, "But most people do.""I wish," said Margaret, striking out a novel thought, "that somebodywould give us all a large fortune apiece!""Oh that they would!" cried Marianne, her eyes sparkling withanimation, and her cheeks glowing with the delight of such imaginaryhappiness."We are all unanimous in that wish, I suppose," said Elinor, "in spiteof the insufficiency of wealth.""Oh dear!" cried Margaret, "how happy I should be!  I wonder what Ishould do with it!"Marianne looked as if she had no doubt on that point."I should be puzzled to spend so large a fortune myself," said Mrs.Dashwood, "if my children were all to be rich without my help.""You must begin your improvements on this house," observed Elinor, "andyour difficulties will soon vanish.""What magnificent orders would travel from this family to London," saidEdward, "in such an event!  What a happy day for booksellers,music-sellers, and print-shops!  You, Miss Dashwood, would give ageneral commission for every new print of merit to be sent you--and asfor Marianne, I know her greatness of soul, there would not be musicenough in London to content her.  And books!--Thomson, Cowper,Scott--she would buy them all over and over again: she would buy upevery copy, I believe, to prevent their falling into unworthy hands;and she would have every book that tells her how to admire an oldtwisted tree.  Should not you, Marianne?  Forgive me, if I am verysaucy.  But I was willing to shew you that I had not forgot our olddisputes.""I love to be reminded of the past, Edward--whether it be melancholy orgay, I love to recall it--and you will never offend me by talking offormer times.  You are very right in supposing how my money would bespent--some of it, at least--my loose cash would certainly be employedin improving my collection of music and books.""And the bulk of your fortune would be laid out in annuities on theauthors or their heirs.""No, Edward, I should have something else to do with it.""Perhaps, then, you would bestow it as a reward on that person whowrote the ablest defence of your favourite maxim, that no one can everbe in love more than once in their life--your opinion on that point isunchanged, I presume?""Undoubtedly. At my time of life opinions are tolerably fixed.  It isnot likely that I should now see or hear any thing to change them.""Marianne is as steadfast as ever, you see," said Elinor, "she is notat all altered.""She is only grown a little more grave than she was.""Nay, Edward," said Marianne, "you need not reproach me.  You are notvery gay yourself.""Why should you think so!" replied he, with a sigh.  "But gaiety neverwas a part of MY character.""Nor do I think it a part of Marianne's," said Elinor; "I should hardlycall her a lively girl--she is very earnest, very eager in all shedoes--sometimes talks a great deal and always with animation--but sheis not often really merry.""I believe you are right," he replied, "and yet I have always set herdown as a lively girl.""I have frequently detected myself in such kind of mistakes," saidElinor, "in a total misapprehension of character in some point orother: fancying people so much more gay or grave, or ingenious orstupid than they really are, and I can hardly tell why or in what thedeception originated.  Sometimes one is guided by what they say ofthemselves, and very frequently by what other people say of them,without giving oneself time to deliberate and judge.""But I thought it was right, Elinor," said Marianne, "to be guidedwholly by the opinion of other people.  I thought our judgments weregiven us merely to be subservient to those of neighbours.  This hasalways been your doctrine, I am sure.""No, Marianne, never.  My doctrine has never aimed at the subjection ofthe understanding.  All I have ever attempted to influence has been thebehaviour.  You must not confound my meaning.  I am guilty, I confess,of having often wished you to treat our acquaintance in general withgreater attention; but when have I advised you to adopt theirsentiments or to conform to their judgment in serious matters?""You have not been able to bring your sister over to your plan ofgeneral civility," said Edward to Elinor.  "Do you gain no ground?""Quite the contrary," replied Elinor, looking expressively at Marianne."My judgment," he returned, "is all on your side of the question; but Iam afraid my practice is much more on your sister's.  I never wish tooffend, but I am so foolishly shy, that I often seem negligent, when Iam only kept back by my natural awkwardness.  I have frequently thoughtthat I must have been intended by nature to be fond of low company, Iam so little at my ease among strangers of gentility!""Marianne has not shyness to excuse any inattention of hers," saidElinor."She knows her own worth too well for false shame," replied Edward."Shyness is only the effect of a sense of inferiority in some way orother.  If I could persuade myself that my manners were perfectly easyand graceful, I should not be shy.""But you would still be reserved," said Marianne, "and that is worse."Edward started--"Reserved! Am I reserved, Marianne?""Yes, very.""I do not understand you," replied he, colouring.  "Reserved!--how, inwhat manner?  What am I to tell you?  What can you suppose?"Elinor looked surprised at his emotion; but trying to laugh off thesubject, she said to him, "Do not you know my sister well enough tounderstand what she means?  Do not you know she calls every onereserved who does not talk as fast, and admire what she admires asrapturously as herself?"Edward made no answer.  His gravity and thoughtfulness returned on himin their fullest extent--and he sat for some time silent and dull.Elinor saw, with great uneasiness the low spirits of her friend.  Hisvisit afforded her but a very partial satisfaction, while his ownenjoyment in it appeared so imperfect.  It was evident that he wasunhappy; she wished it were equally evident that he still distinguishedher by the same affection which once she had felt no doubt ofinspiring; but hitherto the continuance of his preference seemed veryuncertain; and the reservedness of his manner towards her contradictedone moment what a more animated look had intimated the preceding one.He joined her and Marianne in the breakfast-room the next morningbefore the others were down; and Marianne, who was always eager topromote their happiness as far as she could, soon left them tothemselves.  But before she was half way upstairs she heard the parlourdoor open, and, turning round, was astonished to see Edward himselfcome out."I am going into the village to see my horses," said he, "as you arenot yet ready for breakfast; I shall be back again presently."                    ***Edward returned to them with fresh admiration of the surroundingcountry; in his walk to the village, he had seen many parts of thevalley to advantage; and the village itself, in a much higher situationthan the cottage, afforded a general view of the whole, which hadexceedingly pleased him.  This was a subject which ensured Marianne'sattention, and she was beginning to describe her own admiration ofthese scenes, and to question him more minutely on the objects that hadparticularly struck him, when Edward interrupted her by saying, "Youmust not enquire too far, Marianne--remember I have no knowledge in thepicturesque, and I shall offend you by my ignorance and want of tasteif we come to particulars.  I shall call hills steep, which ought to bebold; surfaces strange and uncouth, which ought to be irregular andrugged; and distant objects out of sight, which ought only to beindistinct through the soft medium of a hazy atmosphere.  You must besatisfied with such admiration as I can honestly give.  I call it avery fine country--the hills are steep, the woods seem full of finetimber, and the valley looks comfortable and snug--with rich meadowsand several neat farm houses scattered here and there.  It exactlyanswers my idea of a fine country, because it unites beauty withutility--and I dare say it is a picturesque one too, because you admireit; I can easily believe it to be full of rocks and promontories, greymoss and brush wood, but these are all lost on me.  I know nothing ofthe picturesque.""I am afraid it is but too true," said Marianne; "but why should youboast of it?""I suspect," said Elinor, "that to avoid one kind of affectation,Edward here falls into another.  Because he believes many peoplepretend to more admiration of the beauties of nature than they reallyfeel, and is disgusted with such pretensions, he affects greaterindifference and less discrimination in viewing them himself than hepossesses.  He is fastidious and will have an affectation of his own.""It is very true," said Marianne, "that admiration of landscape sceneryis become a mere jargon.  Every body pretends to feel and tries todescribe with the taste and elegance of him who first defined whatpicturesque beauty was.  I detest jargon of every kind, and sometimes Ihave kept my feelings to myself, because I could find no language todescribe them in but what was worn and hackneyed out of all sense andmeaning.""I am convinced," said Edward, "that you really feel all the delight ina fine prospect which you profess to feel.  But, in return, your sistermust allow me to feel no more than I profess.  I like a fine prospect,but not on picturesque principles.  I do not like crooked, twisted,blasted trees.  I admire them much more if they are tall, straight, andflourishing.  I do not like ruined, tattered cottages.  I am not fondof nettles or thistles, or heath blossoms.  I have more pleasure in asnug farm-house than a watch-tower--and a troop of tidy, happy villagesplease me better than the finest banditti in the world."Marianne looked with amazement at Edward, with compassion at hersister.  Elinor only laughed.The subject was continued no farther; and Marianne remainedthoughtfully silent, till a new object suddenly engaged her attention.She was sitting by Edward, and in taking his tea from Mrs. Dashwood,his hand passed so directly before her, as to make a ring, with a plaitof hair in the centre, very conspicuous on one of his fingers."I never saw you wear a ring before, Edward," she cried.  "Is thatFanny's hair? I remember her promising to give you some.  But I shouldhave thought her hair had been darker."Marianne spoke inconsiderately what she really felt--but when she sawhow much she had pained Edward, her own vexation at her want of thoughtcould not be surpassed by his.  He coloured very deeply, and giving amomentary glance at Elinor, replied, "Yes; it is my sister's hair.  Thesetting always casts a different shade on it, you know."Elinor had met his eye, and looked conscious likewise.  That the hairwas her own, she instantaneously felt as well satisfied as Marianne;the only difference in their conclusions was, that what Marianneconsidered as a free gift from her sister, Elinor was conscious musthave been procured by some theft or contrivance unknown to herself.She was not in a humour, however, to regard it as an affront, andaffecting to take no notice of what passed, by instantly talking ofsomething else, she internally resolved henceforward to catch everyopportunity of eyeing the hair and of satisfying herself, beyond alldoubt, that it was exactly the shade of her own.Edward's embarrassment lasted some time, and it ended in an absence ofmind still more settled.  He was particularly grave the whole morning.Marianne severely censured herself for what she had said; but her ownforgiveness might have been more speedy, had she known how littleoffence it had given her sister.Before the middle of the day, they were visited by Sir John and Mrs.Jennings, who, having heard of the arrival of a gentleman at thecottage, came to take a survey of the guest.  With the assistance ofhis mother-in-law, Sir John was not long in discovering that the nameof Ferrars began with an F. and this prepared a future mine of railleryagainst the devoted Elinor, which nothing but the newness of theiracquaintance with Edward could have prevented from being immediatelysprung.  But, as it was, she only learned, from some very significantlooks, how far their penetration, founded on Margaret's instructions,extended.Sir John never came to the Dashwoods without either inviting them todine at the park the next day, or to drink tea with them that evening.On the present occasion, for the better entertainment of their visitor,towards whose amusement he felt himself bound to contribute, he wishedto engage them for both."You MUST drink tea with us to night," said he, "for we shall be quitealone--and tomorrow you must absolutely dine with us, for we shall be alarge party."Mrs. Jennings enforced the necessity.  "And who knows but you may raisea dance," said she.  "And that will tempt YOU, Miss Marianne.""A dance!" cried Marianne.  "Impossible! Who is to dance?""Who! why yourselves, and the Careys, and Whitakers to be sure.--What!you thought nobody could dance because a certain person that shall benameless is gone!""I wish with all my soul," cried Sir John, "that Willoughby were amongus again."This, and Marianne's blushing, gave new suspicions to Edward.  "And whois Willoughby?" said he, in a low voice, to Miss Dashwood, by whom hewas sitting.She gave him a brief reply.  Marianne's countenance was morecommunicative.  Edward saw enough to comprehend, not only the meaningof others, but such of Marianne's expressions as had puzzled himbefore; and when their visitors left them, he went immediately roundher, and said, in a whisper, "I have been guessing.  Shall I tell youmy guess?""What do you mean?""Shall I tell you.""Certainly.""Well then; I guess that Mr. Willoughby hunts."Marianne was surprised and confused, yet she could not help smiling atthe quiet archness of his manner, and after a moment's silence, said,"Oh, Edward! How can you?--But the time will come I hope...I am sureyou will like him.""I do not doubt it," replied he, rather astonished at her earnestnessand warmth; for had he not imagined it to be a joke for the good of heracquaintance in general, founded only on a something or a nothingbetween Mr. Willoughby and herself, he would not have ventured tomention it.Edward remained a week at the cottage; he was earnestly pressed by Mrs.Dashwood to stay longer; but, as if he were bent only onself-mortification, he seemed resolved to be gone when his enjoymentamong his friends was at the height.  His spirits, during the last twoor three days, though still very unequal, were greatly improved--hegrew more and more partial to the house and environs--never spoke ofgoing away without a sigh--declared his time to be whollydisengaged--even doubted to what place he should go when he leftthem--but still, go he must.  Never had any week passed so quickly--hecould hardly believe it to be gone.  He said so repeatedly; otherthings he said too, which marked the turn of his feelings and gave thelie to his actions.  He had no pleasure at Norland; he detested beingin town; but either to Norland or London, he must go.  He valued theirkindness beyond any thing, and his greatest happiness was in being withthem.  Yet, he must leave them at the end of a week, in spite of theirwishes and his own, and without any restraint on his time.Elinor placed all that was astonishing in this way of acting to hismother's account; and it was happy for her that he had a mother whosecharacter was so imperfectly known to her, as to be the general excusefor every thing strange on the part of her son.  Disappointed, however,and vexed as she was, and sometimes displeased with his uncertainbehaviour to herself, she was very well disposed on the whole to regardhis actions with all the candid allowances and generous qualifications,which had been rather more painfully extorted from her, forWilloughby's service, by her mother.  His want of spirits, of openness,and of consistency, were most usually attributed to his want ofindependence, and his better knowledge of Mrs. Ferrars's dispositionand designs.  The shortness of his visit, the steadiness of his purposein leaving them, originated in the same fettered inclination, the sameinevitable necessity of temporizing with his mother.  The oldwell-established grievance of duty against will, parent against child,was the cause of all.  She would have been glad to know when thesedifficulties were to cease, this opposition was to yield,--when Mrs.Ferrars would be reformed, and her son be at liberty to be happy.  Butfrom such vain wishes she was forced to turn for comfort to the renewalof her confidence in Edward's affection, to the remembrance of everymark of regard in look or word which fell from him while at Barton, andabove all to that flattering proof of it which he constantly wore roundhis finger."I think, Edward," said Mrs. Dashwood, as they were at breakfast thelast morning, "you would be a happier man if you had any profession toengage your time and give an interest to your plans and actions.  Someinconvenience to your friends, indeed, might result from it--you wouldnot be able to give them so much of your time.  But (with a smile) youwould be materially benefited in one particular at least--you wouldknow where to go when you left them.""I do assure you," he replied, "that I have long thought on this point,as you think now.  It has been, and is, and probably will always be aheavy misfortune to me, that I have had no necessary business to engageme, no profession to give me employment, or afford me any thing likeindependence.  But unfortunately my own nicety, and the nicety of myfriends, have made me what I am, an idle, helpless being.  We nevercould agree in our choice of a profession.  I always preferred thechurch, as I still do.  But that was not smart enough for my family.They recommended the army.  That was a great deal too smart for me.The law was allowed to be genteel enough; many young men, who hadchambers in the Temple, made a very good appearance in the firstcircles, and drove about town in very knowing gigs.  But I had noinclination for the law, even in this less abstruse study of it, whichmy family approved.  As for the navy, it had fashion on its side, but Iwas too old when the subject was first started to enter it--and, atlength, as there was no necessity for my having any profession at all,as I might be as dashing and expensive without a red coat on my back aswith one, idleness was pronounced on the whole to be most advantageousand honourable, and a young man of eighteen is not in general soearnestly bent on being busy as to resist the solicitations of hisfriends to do nothing.  I was therefore entered at Oxford and have beenproperly idle ever since.""The consequence of which, I suppose, will be," said Mrs. Dashwood,"since leisure has not promoted your own happiness, that your sons willbe brought up to as many pursuits, employments, professions, and tradesas Columella's.""They will be brought up," said he, in a serious accent, "to be asunlike myself as is possible.  In feeling, in action, in condition, inevery thing.""Come, come; this is all an effusion of immediate want of spirits,Edward.  You are in a melancholy humour, and fancy that any one unlikeyourself must be happy.  But remember that the pain of parting fromfriends will be felt by every body at times, whatever be theireducation or state.  Know your own happiness.  You want nothing butpatience--or give it a more fascinating name, call it hope.  Yourmother will secure to you, in time, that independence you are soanxious for; it is her duty, and it will, it must ere long become herhappiness to prevent your whole youth from being wasted in discontent.How much may not a few months do?""I think," replied Edward, "that I may defy many months to produce anygood to me."This desponding turn of mind, though it could not be communicated toMrs. Dashwood, gave additional pain to them all in the parting, whichshortly took place, and left an uncomfortable impression on Elinor'sfeelings especially, which required some trouble and time to subdue.But as it was her determination to subdue it, and to prevent herselffrom appearing to suffer more than what all her family suffered on hisgoing away, she did not adopt the method so judiciously employed byMarianne, on a similar occasion, to augment and fix her sorrow, byseeking silence, solitude and idleness.  Their means were as differentas their objects, and equally suited to the advancement of each.Elinor sat down to her drawing-table as soon as he was out of thehouse, busily employed herself the whole day, neither sought noravoided the mention of his name, appeared to interest herself almost asmuch as ever in the general concerns of the family, and if, by thisconduct, she did not lessen her own grief, it was at least preventedfrom unnecessary increase, and her mother and sisters were spared muchsolicitude on her account.Such behaviour as this, so exactly the reverse of her own, appeared nomore meritorious to Marianne, than her own had seemed faulty to her.The business of self-command she settled very easily;--with strongaffections it was impossible, with calm ones it could have no merit.That her sister's affections WERE calm, she dared not deny, though sheblushed to acknowledge it; and of the strength of her own, she gave avery striking proof, by still loving and respecting that sister, inspite of this mortifying conviction.Without shutting herself up from her family, or leaving the house indetermined solitude to avoid them, or lying awake the whole night toindulge meditation, Elinor found every day afforded her leisure enoughto think of Edward, and of Edward's behaviour, in every possiblevariety which the different state of her spirits at different timescould produce,--with tenderness, pity, approbation, censure, and doubt.There were moments in abundance, when, if not by the absence of hermother and sisters, at least by the nature of their employments,conversation was forbidden among them, and every effect of solitude wasproduced.  Her mind was inevitably at liberty; her thoughts could notbe chained elsewhere; and the past and the future, on a subject sointeresting, must be before her, must force her attention, and engrossher memory, her reflection, and her fancy.From a reverie of this kind, as she sat at her drawing-table, she wasroused one morning, soon after Edward's leaving them, by the arrival ofcompany.  She happened to be quite alone.  The closing of the littlegate, at the entrance of the green court in front of the house, drewher eyes to the window, and she saw a large party walking up to thedoor.  Amongst them were Sir John and Lady Middleton and Mrs. Jennings,but there were two others, a gentleman and lady, who were quite unknownto her.  She was sitting near the window, and as soon as Sir Johnperceived her, he left the rest of the party to the ceremony ofknocking at the door, and stepping across the turf, obliged her to openthe casement to speak to him, though the space was so short between thedoor and the window, as to make it hardly possible to speak at onewithout being heard at the other."Well," said he, "we have brought you some strangers.  How do you likethem?""Hush! they will hear you.""Never mind if they do.  It is only the Palmers.  Charlotte is verypretty, I can tell you.  You may see her if you look this way."As Elinor was certain of seeing her in a couple of minutes, withouttaking that liberty, she begged to be excused."Where is Marianne? Has she run away because we are come? I see herinstrument is open.""She is walking, I believe."They were now joined by Mrs. Jennings, who had not patience enough towait till the door was opened before she told HER story.  She camehallooing to the window, "How do you do, my dear?  How does Mrs.Dashwood do?  And where are your sisters?  What! all alone! you will beglad of a little company to sit with you.  I have brought my other sonand daughter to see you.  Only think of their coming so suddenly!  Ithought I heard a carriage last night, while we were drinking our tea,but it never entered my head that it could be them.  I thought ofnothing but whether it might not be Colonel Brandon come back again; soI said to Sir John, I do think I hear a carriage; perhaps it is ColonelBrandon come back again"--Elinor was obliged to turn from her, in the middle of her story, toreceive the rest of the party; Lady Middleton introduced the twostrangers; Mrs. Dashwood and Margaret came down stairs at the sametime, and they all sat down to look at one another, while Mrs. Jenningscontinued her story as she walked through the passage into the parlour,attended by Sir John.Mrs. Palmer was several years younger than Lady Middleton, and totallyunlike her in every respect.  She was short and plump, had a verypretty face, and the finest expression of good humour in it that couldpossibly be.  Her manners were by no means so elegant as her sister's,but they were much more prepossessing.  She came in with a smile,smiled all the time of her visit, except when she laughed, and smiledwhen she went away.  Her husband was a grave looking young man of fiveor six and twenty, with an air of more fashion and sense than his wife,but of less willingness to please or be pleased.  He entered the roomwith a look of self-consequence, slightly bowed to the ladies, withoutspeaking a word, and, after briefly surveying them and theirapartments, took up a newspaper from the table, and continued to readit as long as he staid.Mrs. Palmer, on the contrary, who was strongly endowed by nature with aturn for being uniformly civil and happy, was hardly seated before heradmiration of the parlour and every thing in it burst forth."Well! what a delightful room this is! I never saw anything socharming!  Only think, Mama, how it is improved since I was here last!I always thought it such a sweet place, ma'am! (turning to Mrs.Dashwood) but you have made it so charming!  Only look, sister, howdelightful every thing is! How I should like such a house for myself!Should not you, Mr. Palmer?"Mr. Palmer made her no answer, and did not even raise his eyes from thenewspaper."Mr. Palmer does not hear me," said she, laughing; "he never doessometimes.  It is so ridiculous!"This was quite a new idea to Mrs. Dashwood; she had never been used tofind wit in the inattention of any one, and could not help looking withsurprise at them both.Mrs. Jennings, in the meantime, talked on as loud as she could, andcontinued her account of their surprise, the evening before, on seeingtheir friends, without ceasing till every thing was told.  Mrs. Palmerlaughed heartily at the recollection of their astonishment, and everybody agreed, two or three times over, that it had been quite anagreeable surprise."You may believe how glad we all were to see them," added Mrs.Jennings, leaning forward towards Elinor, and speaking in a low voiceas if she meant to be heard by no one else, though they were seated ondifferent sides of the room; "but, however, I can't help wishing theyhad not travelled quite so fast, nor made such a long journey of it,for they came all round by London upon account of some business, foryou know (nodding significantly and pointing to her daughter) it waswrong in her situation.  I wanted her to stay at home and rest thismorning, but she would come with us; she longed so much to see you all!"Mrs. Palmer laughed, and said it would not do her any harm."She expects to be confined in February," continued Mrs. Jennings.Lady Middleton could no longer endure such a conversation, andtherefore exerted herself to ask Mr. Palmer if there was any news inthe paper."No, none at all," he replied, and read on."Here comes Marianne," cried Sir John.  "Now, Palmer, you shall see amonstrous pretty girl."He immediately went into the passage, opened the front door, andushered her in himself.  Mrs. Jennings asked her, as soon as sheappeared, if she had not been to Allenham; and Mrs. Palmer laughed soheartily at the question, as to show she understood it.  Mr. Palmerlooked up on her entering the room, stared at her some minutes, andthen returned to his newspaper.  Mrs. Palmer's eye was now caught bythe drawings which hung round the room.  She got up to examine them."Oh! dear, how beautiful these are!  Well! how delightful!  Do butlook, mama, how sweet! I declare they are quite charming; I could lookat them for ever." And then sitting down again, she very soon forgotthat there were any such things in the room.When Lady Middleton rose to go away, Mr. Palmer rose also, laid downthe newspaper, stretched himself and looked at them all around."My love, have you been asleep?" said his wife, laughing.He made her no answer; and only observed, after again examining theroom, that it was very low pitched, and that the ceiling was crooked.He then made his bow, and departed with the rest.Sir John had been very urgent with them all to spend the next day atthe park.  Mrs. Dashwood, who did not chuse to dine with them oftenerthan they dined at the cottage, absolutely refused on her own account;her daughters might do as they pleased.  But they had no curiosity tosee how Mr. and Mrs. Palmer ate their dinner, and no expectation ofpleasure from them in any other way.  They attempted, therefore,likewise, to excuse themselves; the weather was uncertain, and notlikely to be good.  But Sir John would not be satisfied--the carriageshould be sent for them and they must come.  Lady Middleton too, thoughshe did not press their mother, pressed them.  Mrs. Jennings and Mrs.Palmer joined their entreaties, all seemed equally anxious to avoid afamily party; and the young ladies were obliged to yield."Why should they ask us?" said Marianne, as soon as they were gone."The rent of this cottage is said to be low; but we have it on veryhard terms, if we are to dine at the park whenever any one is stayingeither with them, or with us.""They mean no less to be civil and kind to us now," said Elinor, "bythese frequent invitations, than by those which we received from them afew weeks ago.  The alteration is not in them, if their parties aregrown tedious and dull.  We must look for the change elsewhere."As the Miss Dashwoods entered the drawing-room of the park the nextday, at one door, Mrs. Palmer came running in at the other, looking asgood humoured and merry as before.  She took them all mostaffectionately by the hand, and expressed great delight in seeing themagain."I am so glad to see you!" said she, seating herself between Elinor andMarianne, "for it is so bad a day I was afraid you might not come,which would be a shocking thing, as we go away again tomorrow. We mustgo, for the Westons come to us next week you know.  It was quite asudden thing our coming at all, and I knew nothing of it till thecarriage was coming to the door, and then Mr. Palmer asked me if Iwould go with him to Barton.  He is so droll! He never tells me anything! I am so sorry we cannot stay longer; however we shall meet againin town very soon, I hope."They were obliged to put an end to such an expectation."Not go to town!" cried Mrs. Palmer, with a laugh, "I shall be quitedisappointed if you do not.  I could get the nicest house in the world foryou, next door to ours, in Hanover-square.  You must come, indeed.  Iam sure I shall be very happy to chaperon you at any time till I amconfined, if Mrs. Dashwood should not like to go into public."They thanked her; but were obliged to resist all her entreaties."Oh, my love," cried Mrs. Palmer to her husband, who just then enteredthe room--"you must help me to persuade the Miss Dashwoods to go totown this winter."Her love made no answer; and after slightly bowing to the ladies, begancomplaining of the weather."How horrid all this is!" said he.  "Such weather makes every thing andevery body disgusting.  Dullness is as much produced within doors aswithout, by rain.  It makes one detest all one's acquaintance.  Whatthe devil does Sir John mean by not having a billiard room in hishouse?  How few people know what comfort is!  Sir John is as stupid asthe weather."The rest of the company soon dropt in."I am afraid, Miss Marianne," said Sir John, "you have not been able totake your usual walk to Allenham today."Marianne looked very grave and said nothing."Oh, don't be so sly before us," said Mrs. Palmer; "for we know allabout it, I assure you; and I admire your taste very much, for I thinkhe is extremely handsome.  We do not live a great way from him in thecountry, you know.  Not above ten miles, I dare say.""Much nearer thirty," said her husband."Ah, well! there is not much difference.  I never was at his house; butthey say it is a sweet pretty place.""As vile a spot as I ever saw in my life," said Mr. Palmer.Marianne remained perfectly silent, though her countenance betrayed herinterest in what was said."Is it very ugly?" continued Mrs. Palmer--"then it must be some otherplace that is so pretty I suppose."When they were seated in the dining room, Sir John observed with regretthat they were only eight all together."My dear," said he to his lady, "it is very provoking that we should beso few.  Why did not you ask the Gilberts to come to us today?""Did not I tell you, Sir John, when you spoke to me about it before,that it could not be done?  They dined with us last.""You and I, Sir John," said Mrs. Jennings, "should not stand upon suchceremony.""Then you would be very ill-bred," cried Mr. Palmer."My love you contradict every body," said his wife with her usuallaugh.  "Do you know that you are quite rude?""I did not know I contradicted any body in calling your motherill-bred.""Ay, you may abuse me as you please," said the good-natured old lady,"you have taken Charlotte off my hands, and cannot give her back again.So there I have the whip hand of you."Charlotte laughed heartily to think that her husband could not get ridof her; and exultingly said, she did not care how cross he was to her,as they must live together.  It was impossible for any one to be morethoroughly good-natured, or more determined to be happy than Mrs.Palmer.  The studied indifference, insolence, and discontent of herhusband gave her no pain; and when he scolded or abused her, she washighly diverted."Mr. Palmer is so droll!" said she, in a whisper, to Elinor.  "He isalways out of humour."Elinor was not inclined, after a little observation, to give him creditfor being so genuinely and unaffectedly ill-natured or ill-bred as hewished to appear.  His temper might perhaps be a little soured byfinding, like many others of his sex, that through some unaccountablebias in favour of beauty, he was the husband of a very sillywoman,--but she knew that this kind of blunder was too common for anysensible man to be lastingly hurt by it.-- It was rather a wish ofdistinction, she believed, which produced his contemptuous treatment ofevery body, and his general abuse of every thing before him.  It wasthe desire of appearing superior to other people.  The motive was toocommon to be wondered at; but the means, however they might succeed byestablishing his superiority in ill-breeding, were not likely to attachany one to him except his wife."Oh, my dear Miss Dashwood," said Mrs. Palmer soon afterwards, "I havegot such a favour to ask of you and your sister.  Will you come andspend some time at Cleveland this Christmas?  Now, pray do,--and comewhile the Westons are with us.  You cannot think how happy I shall be!It will be quite delightful!--My love," applying to her husband, "don'tyou long to have the Miss Dashwoods come to Cleveland?""Certainly," he replied, with a sneer--"I came into Devonshire with noother view.""There now,"--said his lady, "you see Mr. Palmer expects you; so youcannot refuse to come."They both eagerly and resolutely declined her invitation."But indeed you must and shall come.  I am sure you will like it of allthings.  The Westons will be with us, and it will be quite delightful.You cannot think what a sweet place Cleveland is; and we are so gaynow, for Mr. Palmer is always going about the country canvassingagainst the election; and so many people came to dine with us that Inever saw before, it is quite charming!  But, poor fellow! it is veryfatiguing to him! for he is forced to make every body like him."Elinor could hardly keep her countenance as she assented to thehardship of such an obligation."How charming it will be," said Charlotte, "when he is inParliament!--won't it? How I shall laugh!  It will be so ridiculous tosee all his letters directed to him with an M.P.--But do you know, hesays, he will never frank for me?  He declares he won't.  Don't you,Mr. Palmer?"Mr. Palmer took no notice of her."He cannot bear writing, you know," she continued--"he says it is quiteshocking.""No," said he, "I never said any thing so irrational.  Don't palm allyour abuses of languages upon me.""There now; you see how droll he is.  This is always the way with him!Sometimes he won't speak to me for half a day together, and then hecomes out with something so droll--all about any thing in the world."She surprised Elinor very much as they returned into the drawing-room,by asking her whether she did not like Mr. Palmer excessively."Certainly," said Elinor; "he seems very agreeable.""Well--I am so glad you do.  I thought you would, he is so pleasant;and Mr. Palmer is excessively pleased with you and your sisters I cantell you, and you can't think how disappointed he will be if you don'tcome to Cleveland.--I can't imagine why you should object to it."Elinor was again obliged to decline her invitation; and by changing thesubject, put a stop to her entreaties.  She thought it probable that asthey lived in the same county, Mrs. Palmer might be able to give somemore particular account of Willoughby's general character, than couldbe gathered from the Middletons' partial acquaintance with him; and shewas eager to gain from any one, such a confirmation of his merits asmight remove the possibility of fear from Marianne.  She began byinquiring if they saw much of Mr. Willoughby at Cleveland, and whetherthey were intimately acquainted with him."Oh dear, yes; I know him extremely well," replied Mrs. Palmer;--"Notthat I ever spoke to him, indeed; but I have seen him for ever in town.Somehow or other I never happened to be staying at Barton while he wasat Allenham.  Mama saw him here once before;--but I was with my uncleat Weymouth.  However, I dare say we should have seen a great deal ofhim in Somersetshire, if it had not happened very unluckily that weshould never have been in the country together.  He is very little atCombe, I believe; but if he were ever so much there, I do not think Mr.Palmer would visit him, for he is in the opposition, you know, andbesides it is such a way off.  I know why you inquire about him, verywell; your sister is to marry him.  I am monstrous glad of it, for thenI shall have her for a neighbour you know.""Upon my word," replied Elinor, "you know much more of the matter thanI do, if you have any reason to expect such a match.""Don't pretend to deny it, because you know it is what every body talksof.  I assure you I heard of it in my way through town.""My dear Mrs. Palmer!""Upon my honour I did.--I met Colonel Brandon Monday morning inBond-street, just before we left town, and he told me of it directly.""You surprise me very much.  Colonel Brandon tell you of it!  Surelyyou must be mistaken.  To give such intelligence to a person who couldnot be interested in it, even if it were true, is not what I shouldexpect Colonel Brandon to do.""But I do assure you it was so, for all that, and I will tell you howit happened.  When we met him, he turned back and walked with us; andso we began talking of my brother and sister, and one thing andanother, and I said to him, 'So, Colonel, there is a new family come toBarton cottage, I hear, and mama sends me word they are very pretty,and that one of them is going to be married to Mr. Willoughby of CombeMagna.  Is it true, pray? for of course you must know, as you have beenin Devonshire so lately.'""And what did the Colonel say?""Oh--he did not say much; but he looked as if he knew it to be true, sofrom that moment I set it down as certain.  It will be quitedelightful, I declare!  When is it to take place?""Mr. Brandon was very well I hope?""Oh! yes, quite well; and so full of your praises, he did nothing butsay fine things of you.""I am flattered by his commendation.  He seems an excellent man; and Ithink him uncommonly pleasing.""So do I.--He is such a charming man, that it is quite a pity he shouldbe so grave and so dull.  Mama says HE was in love with your sistertoo.-- I assure you it was a great compliment if he was, for he hardlyever falls in love with any body.""Is Mr. Willoughby much known in your part of Somersetshire?" saidElinor."Oh! yes, extremely well; that is, I do not believe many people areacquainted with him, because Combe Magna is so far off; but they allthink him extremely agreeable I assure you.  Nobody is more liked thanMr. Willoughby wherever he goes, and so you may tell your sister.  Sheis a monstrous lucky girl to get him, upon my honour; not but that heis much more lucky in getting her, because she is so very handsome andagreeable, that nothing can be good enough for her.  However, I don'tthink her hardly at all handsomer than you, I assure you; for I thinkyou both excessively pretty, and so does Mr. Palmer too I am sure,though we could not get him to own it last night."Mrs. Palmer's information respecting Willoughby was not very material;but any testimony in his favour, however small, was pleasing to her."I am so glad we are got acquainted at last," continuedCharlotte.--"And now I hope we shall always be great friends.  Youcan't think how much I longed to see you!  It is so delightful that youshould live at the cottage!  Nothing can be like it, to be sure!  And Iam so glad your sister is going to be well married!  I hope you will bea great deal at Combe Magna.  It is a sweet place, by all accounts.""You have been long acquainted with Colonel Brandon, have not you?""Yes, a great while; ever since my sister married.-- He was aparticular friend of Sir John's. I believe," she added in a low voice,"he would have been very glad to have had me, if he could.  Sir Johnand Lady Middleton wished it very much.  But mama did not think thematch good enough for me, otherwise Sir John would have mentioned it tothe Colonel, and we should have been married immediately.""Did not Colonel Brandon know of Sir John's proposal to your motherbefore it was made?  Had he never owned his affection to yourself?""Oh, no; but if mama had not objected to it, I dare say he would haveliked it of all things.  He had not seen me then above twice, for itwas before I left school.  However, I am much happier as I am.  Mr.Palmer is the kind of man I like."The Palmers returned to Cleveland the next day, and the two families atBarton were again left to entertain each other.  But this did not lastlong; Elinor had hardly got their last visitors out of her head, hadhardly done wondering at Charlotte's being so happy without a cause, atMr. Palmer's acting so simply, with good abilities, and at the strangeunsuitableness which often existed between husband and wife, before SirJohn's and Mrs. Jennings's active zeal in the cause of society,procured her some other new acquaintance to see and observe.In a morning's excursion to Exeter, they had met with two young ladies,whom Mrs. Jennings had the satisfaction of discovering to be herrelations, and this was enough for Sir John to invite them directly tothe park, as soon as their present engagements at Exeter were over.Their engagements at Exeter instantly gave way before such aninvitation, and Lady Middleton was thrown into no little alarm on thereturn of Sir John, by hearing that she was very soon to receive avisit from two girls whom she had never seen in her life, and of whoseelegance,--whose tolerable gentility even, she could have no proof; forthe assurances of her husband and mother on that subject went fornothing at all.  Their being her relations too made it so much theworse; and Mrs. Jennings's attempts at consolation were thereforeunfortunately founded, when she advised her daughter not to care abouttheir being so fashionable; because they were all cousins and must putup with one another.  As it was impossible, however, now to preventtheir coming, Lady Middleton resigned herself to the idea of it, withall the philosophy of a well-bred woman, contenting herself with merelygiving her husband a gentle reprimand on the subject five or six timesevery day.The young ladies arrived: their appearance was by no means ungenteel orunfashionable.  Their dress was very smart, their manners very civil,they were delighted with the house, and in raptures with the furniture,and they happened to be so doatingly fond of children that LadyMiddleton's good opinion was engaged in their favour before they hadbeen an hour at the Park.  She declared them to be very agreeable girlsindeed, which for her ladyship was enthusiastic admiration.  Sir John'sconfidence in his own judgment rose with this animated praise, and heset off directly for the cottage to tell the Miss Dashwoods of the MissSteeles' arrival, and to assure them of their being the sweetest girlsin the world.  From such commendation as this, however, there was notmuch to be learned; Elinor well knew that the sweetest girls in theworld were to be met with in every part of England, under everypossible variation of form, face, temper and understanding.  Sir Johnwanted the whole family to walk to the Park directly and look at hisguests.  Benevolent, philanthropic man!  It was painful to him even tokeep a third cousin to himself."Do come now," said he--"pray come--you must come--I declare you shallcome--You can't think how you will like them.  Lucy is monstrouspretty, and so good humoured and agreeable!  The children are allhanging about her already, as if she was an old acquaintance.  And theyboth long to see you of all things, for they have heard at Exeter thatyou are the most beautiful creatures in the world; and I have told themit is all very true, and a great deal more.  You will be delighted withthem I am sure.  They have brought the whole coach full of playthingsfor the children.  How can you be so cross as not to come?  Why theyare your cousins, you know, after a fashion.  YOU are my cousins, andthey are my wife's, so you must be related."But Sir John could not prevail.  He could only obtain a promise oftheir calling at the Park within a day or two, and then left them inamazement at their indifference, to walk home and boast anew of theirattractions to the Miss Steeles, as he had been already boasting of theMiss Steeles to them.When their promised visit to the Park and consequent introduction tothese young ladies took place, they found in the appearance of theeldest, who was nearly thirty, with a very plain and not a sensibleface, nothing to admire; but in the other, who was not more than two orthree and twenty, they acknowledged considerable beauty; her featureswere pretty, and she had a sharp quick eye, and a smartness of air,which though it did not give actual elegance or grace, gave distinctionto her person.-- Their manners were particularly civil, and Elinor soonallowed them credit for some kind of sense, when she saw with whatconstant and judicious attention they were making themselves agreeableto Lady Middleton.  With her children they were in continual raptures,extolling their beauty, courting their notice, and humouring theirwhims; and such of their time as could be spared from the importunatedemands which this politeness made on it, was spent in admiration ofwhatever her ladyship was doing, if she happened to be doing any thing,or in taking patterns of some elegant new dress, in which herappearance the day before had thrown them into unceasing delight.Fortunately for those who pay their court through such foibles, a fondmother, though, in pursuit of praise for her children, the mostrapacious of human beings, is likewise the most credulous; her demandsare exorbitant; but she will swallow any thing; and the excessiveaffection and endurance of the Miss Steeles towards her offspring wereviewed therefore by Lady Middleton without the smallest surprise ordistrust.  She saw with maternal complacency all the impertinentencroachments and mischievous tricks to which her cousins submitted.She saw their sashes untied, their hair pulled about their ears, theirwork-bags searched, and their knives and scissors stolen away, and feltno doubt of its being a reciprocal enjoyment.  It suggested no othersurprise than that Elinor and Marianne should sit so composedly by,without claiming a share in what was passing."John is in such spirits today!" said she, on his taking Miss Steeles'spocket handkerchief, and throwing it out of window--"He is full ofmonkey tricks."And soon afterwards, on the second boy's violently pinching one of thesame lady's fingers, she fondly observed, "How playful William is!""And here is my sweet little Annamaria," she added, tenderly caressinga little girl of three years old, who had not made a noise for the lasttwo minutes; "And she is always so gentle and quiet--Never was theresuch a quiet little thing!"But unfortunately in bestowing these embraces, a pin in her ladyship'shead dress slightly scratching the child's neck, produced from thispattern of gentleness such violent screams, as could hardly be outdoneby any creature professedly noisy.  The mother's consternation wasexcessive; but it could not surpass the alarm of the Miss Steeles, andevery thing was done by all three, in so critical an emergency, whichaffection could suggest as likely to assuage the agonies of the littlesufferer.  She was seated in her mother's lap, covered with kisses, herwound bathed with lavender-water, by one of the Miss Steeles, who wason her knees to attend her, and her mouth stuffed with sugar plums bythe other.  With such a reward for her tears, the child was too wise tocease crying.  She still screamed and sobbed lustily, kicked her twobrothers for offering to touch her, and all their united soothings wereineffectual till Lady Middleton luckily remembering that in a scene ofsimilar distress last week, some apricot marmalade had beensuccessfully applied for a bruised temple, the same remedy was eagerlyproposed for this unfortunate scratch, and a slight intermission ofscreams in the young lady on hearing it, gave them reason to hope thatit would not be rejected.-- She was carried out of the room thereforein her mother's arms, in quest of this medicine, and as the two boyschose to follow, though earnestly entreated by their mother to staybehind, the four young ladies were left in a quietness which the roomhad not known for many hours."Poor little creatures!" said Miss Steele, as soon as they were gone."It might have been a very sad accident.""Yet I hardly know how," cried Marianne, "unless it had been undertotally different circumstances.  But this is the usual way ofheightening alarm, where there is nothing to be alarmed at in reality.""What a sweet woman Lady Middleton is!" said Lucy Steele.Marianne was silent; it was impossible for her to say what she did notfeel, however trivial the occasion; and upon Elinor therefore the wholetask of telling lies when politeness required it, always fell.  She didher best when thus called on, by speaking of Lady Middleton with morewarmth than she felt, though with far less than Miss Lucy."And Sir John too," cried the elder sister, "what a charming man he is!"Here too, Miss Dashwood's commendation, being only simple and just,came in without any eclat.  She merely observed that he was perfectlygood humoured and friendly."And what a charming little family they have!  I never saw such finechildren in my life.--I declare I quite doat upon them already, andindeed I am always distractedly fond of children.""I should guess so," said Elinor, with a smile, "from what I havewitnessed this morning.""I have a notion," said Lucy, "you think the little Middletons rathertoo much indulged; perhaps they may be the outside of enough; but it isso natural in Lady Middleton; and for my part, I love to see childrenfull of life and spirits; I cannot bear them if they are tame andquiet.""I confess," replied Elinor, "that while I am at Barton Park, I neverthink of tame and quiet children with any abhorrence."A short pause succeeded this speech, which was first broken by MissSteele, who seemed very much disposed for conversation, and who nowsaid rather abruptly, "And how do you like Devonshire, Miss Dashwood?I suppose you were very sorry to leave Sussex."In some surprise at the familiarity of this question, or at least ofthe manner in which it was spoken, Elinor replied that she was."Norland is a prodigious beautiful place, is not it?" added Miss Steele."We have heard Sir John admire it excessively," said Lucy, who seemedto think some apology necessary for the freedom of her sister."I think every one MUST admire it," replied Elinor, "who ever saw theplace; though it is not to be supposed that any one can estimate itsbeauties as we do.""And had you a great many smart beaux there?  I suppose you have not somany in this part of the world; for my part, I think they are a vastaddition always.""But why should you think," said Lucy, looking ashamed of her sister,"that there are not as many genteel young men in Devonshire as Sussex?""Nay, my dear, I'm sure I don't pretend to say that there an't.  I'msure there's a vast many smart beaux in Exeter; but you know, how couldI tell what smart beaux there might be about Norland; and I was onlyafraid the Miss Dashwoods might find it dull at Barton, if they had notso many as they used to have.  But perhaps you young ladies may notcare about the beaux, and had as lief be without them as with them.For my part, I think they are vastly agreeable, provided they dresssmart and behave civil.  But I can't bear to see them dirty and nasty.Now there's Mr. Rose at Exeter, a prodigious smart young man, quite abeau, clerk to Mr. Simpson, you know, and yet if you do but meet him ofa morning, he is not fit to be seen.-- I suppose your brother was quitea beau, Miss Dashwood, before he married, as he was so rich?""Upon my word," replied Elinor, "I cannot tell you, for I do notperfectly comprehend the meaning of the word.  But this I can say, thatif he ever was a beau before he married, he is one still for there isnot the smallest alteration in him.""Oh! dear! one never thinks of married men's being beaux--they havesomething else to do.""Lord! Anne," cried her sister, "you can talk of nothing butbeaux;--you will make Miss Dashwood believe you think of nothing else."And then to turn the discourse, she began admiring the house and thefurniture.This specimen of the Miss Steeles was enough.  The vulgar freedom andfolly of the eldest left her no recommendation, and as Elinor was notblinded by the beauty, or the shrewd look of the youngest, to her wantof real elegance and artlessness, she left the house without any wishof knowing them better.Not so the Miss Steeles.--They came from Exeter, well provided withadmiration for the use of Sir John Middleton, his family, and all hisrelations, and no niggardly proportion was now dealt out to his faircousins, whom they declared to be the most beautiful, elegant,accomplished, and agreeable girls they had ever beheld, and with whomthey were particularly anxious to be better acquainted.-- And to bebetter acquainted therefore, Elinor soon found was their inevitablelot, for as Sir John was entirely on the side of the Miss Steeles,their party would be too strong for opposition, and that kind ofintimacy must be submitted to, which consists of sitting an hour or twotogether in the same room almost every day.  Sir John could do no more;but he did not know that any more was required: to be together was, inhis opinion, to be intimate, and while his continual schemes for theirmeeting were effectual, he had not a doubt of their being establishedfriends.To do him justice, he did every thing in his power to promote theirunreserve, by making the Miss Steeles acquainted with whatever he knewor supposed of his cousins' situations in the most delicateparticulars,--and Elinor had not seen them more than twice, before theeldest of them wished her joy on her sister's having been so lucky asto make a conquest of a very smart beau since she came to Barton."'Twill be a fine thing to have her married so young to be sure," saidshe, "and I hear he is quite a beau, and prodigious handsome.  And Ihope you may have as good luck yourself soon,--but perhaps you may havea friend in the corner already."Elinor could not suppose that Sir John would be more nice inproclaiming his suspicions of her regard for Edward, than he had beenwith respect to Marianne; indeed it was rather his favourite joke ofthe two, as being somewhat newer and more conjectural; and sinceEdward's visit, they had never dined together without his drinking toher best affections with so much significancy and so many nods andwinks, as to excite general attention.  The letter F--had been likewiseinvariably brought forward, and found productive of such countlessjokes, that its character as the wittiest letter in the alphabet hadbeen long established with Elinor.The Miss Steeles, as she expected, had now all the benefit of thesejokes, and in the eldest of them they raised a curiosity to know thename of the gentleman alluded to, which, though often impertinentlyexpressed, was perfectly of a piece with her general inquisitivenessinto the concerns of their family.  But Sir John did not sport longwith the curiosity which he delighted to raise, for he had at least asmuch pleasure in telling the name, as Miss Steele had in hearing it."His name is Ferrars," said he, in a very audible whisper; "but pray donot tell it, for it's a great secret.""Ferrars!" repeated Miss Steele; "Mr. Ferrars is the happy man, is he?What! your sister-in-law's brother, Miss Dashwood? a very agreeableyoung man to be sure; I know him very well.""How can you say so, Anne?" cried Lucy, who generally made an amendmentto all her sister's assertions.  "Though we have seen him once or twiceat my uncle's, it is rather too much to pretend to know him very well."Elinor heard all this with attention and surprise.  "And who was thisuncle?  Where did he live?  How came they acquainted?"  She wished verymuch to have the subject continued, though she did not chuse to join init herself; but nothing more of it was said, and for the first time inher life, she thought Mrs. Jennings deficient either in curiosity afterpetty information, or in a disposition to communicate it.  The mannerin which Miss Steele had spoken of Edward, increased her curiosity; forit struck her as being rather ill-natured, and suggested the suspicionof that lady's knowing, or fancying herself to know something to hisdisadvantage.--But her curiosity was unavailing, for no farther noticewas taken of Mr. Ferrars's name by Miss Steele when alluded to, or evenopenly mentioned by Sir John.Marianne, who had never much toleration for any thing likeimpertinence, vulgarity, inferiority of parts, or even difference oftaste from herself, was at this time particularly ill-disposed, fromthe state of her spirits, to be pleased with the Miss Steeles, or toencourage their advances; and to the invariable coldness of herbehaviour towards them, which checked every endeavour at intimacy ontheir side, Elinor principally attributed that preference of herselfwhich soon became evident in the manners of both, but especially ofLucy, who missed no opportunity of engaging her in conversation, or ofstriving to improve their acquaintance by an easy and frankcommunication of her sentiments.Lucy was naturally clever; her remarks were often just and amusing; andas a companion for half an hour Elinor frequently found her agreeable;but her powers had received no aid from education: she was ignorant andilliterate; and her deficiency of all mental improvement, her want ofinformation in the most common particulars, could not be concealed fromMiss Dashwood, in spite of her constant endeavour to appear toadvantage.  Elinor saw, and pitied her for, the neglect of abilitieswhich education might have rendered so respectable; but she saw, withless tenderness of feeling, the thorough want of delicacy, ofrectitude, and integrity of mind, which her attentions, herassiduities, her flatteries at the Park betrayed; and she could have nolasting satisfaction in the company of a person who joined insinceritywith ignorance; whose want of instruction prevented their meeting inconversation on terms of equality, and whose conduct toward others madeevery shew of attention and deference towards herself perfectlyvalueless."You will think my question an odd one, I dare say," said Lucy to herone day, as they were walking together from the park to thecottage--"but pray, are you personally acquainted with yoursister-in-law's mother, Mrs. Ferrars?"Elinor DID think the question a very odd one, and her countenanceexpressed it, as she answered that she had never seen Mrs. Ferrars."Indeed!" replied Lucy; "I wonder at that, for I thought you must haveseen her at Norland sometimes.  Then, perhaps, you cannot tell me whatsort of a woman she is?""No," returned Elinor, cautious of giving her real opinion of Edward'smother, and not very desirous of satisfying what seemed impertinentcuriosity-- "I know nothing of her.""I am sure you think me very strange, for enquiring about her in such away," said Lucy, eyeing Elinor attentively as she spoke; "but perhapsthere may be reasons--I wish I might venture; but however I hope youwill do me the justice of believing that I do not mean to beimpertinent."Elinor made her a civil reply, and they walked on for a few minutes insilence.  It was broken by Lucy, who renewed the subject again bysaying, with some hesitation,"I cannot bear to have you think me impertinently curious.  I am sure Iwould rather do any thing in the world than be thought so by a personwhose good opinion is so well worth having as yours.  And I am sure Ishould not have the smallest fear of trusting YOU; indeed, I should bevery glad of your advice how to manage in such an uncomfortablesituation as I am; but, however, there is no occasion to trouble YOU.I am sorry you do not happen to know Mrs. Ferrars.""I am sorry I do NOT," said Elinor, in great astonishment, "if it couldbe of any use to YOU to know my opinion of her.  But really I neverunderstood that you were at all connected with that family, andtherefore I am a little surprised, I confess, at so serious an inquiryinto her character.""I dare say you are, and I am sure I do not at all wonder at it.  Butif I dared tell you all, you would not be so much surprised.  Mrs.Ferrars is certainly nothing to me at present--but the time MAYcome--how soon it will come must depend upon herself--when we may bevery intimately connected."She looked down as she said this, amiably bashful, with only one sideglance at her companion to observe its effect on her."Good heavens!" cried Elinor, "what do you mean?  Are you acquaintedwith Mr. Robert Ferrars?  Can you be?" And she did not feel muchdelighted with the idea of such a sister-in-law."No," replied Lucy, "not to Mr. ROBERT Ferrars--I never saw him in mylife; but," fixing her eyes upon Elinor, "to his eldest brother."What felt Elinor at that moment? Astonishment, that would have been aspainful as it was strong, had not an immediate disbelief of theassertion attended it.  She turned towards Lucy in silent amazement,unable to divine the reason or object of such a declaration; and thoughher complexion varied, she stood firm in incredulity, and felt in nodanger of an hysterical fit, or a swoon."You may well be surprised," continued Lucy; "for to be sure you couldhave had no idea of it before; for I dare say he never dropped thesmallest hint of it to you or any of your family; because it was alwaysmeant to be a great secret, and I am sure has been faithfully kept soby me to this hour.  Not a soul of all my relations know of it butAnne, and I never should have mentioned it to you, if I had not feltthe greatest dependence in the world upon your secrecy; and I reallythought my behaviour in asking so many questions about Mrs. Ferrarsmust seem so odd, that it ought to be explained.  And I do not thinkMr. Ferrars can be displeased, when he knows I have trusted you,because I know he has the highest opinion in the world of all yourfamily, and looks upon yourself and the other Miss Dashwoods quite ashis own sisters."--She paused.Elinor for a few moments remained silent.  Her astonishment at what sheheard was at first too great for words; but at length forcing herselfto speak, and to speak cautiously, she said, with calmness of manner,which tolerably well concealed her surprise and solicitude-- "May I askif your engagement is of long standing?""We have been engaged these four years.""Four years!""Yes."Elinor, though greatly shocked, still felt unable to believe it."I did not know," said she, "that you were even acquainted till theother day.""Our acquaintance, however, is of many years date.  He was under myuncle's care, you know, a considerable while.""Your uncle!""Yes; Mr. Pratt.  Did you never hear him talk of Mr. Pratt?""I think I have," replied Elinor, with an exertion of spirits, whichincreased with her increase of emotion."He was four years with my uncle, who lives at Longstaple, nearPlymouth.  It was there our acquaintance begun, for my sister and mewas often staying with my uncle, and it was there our engagement wasformed, though not till a year after he had quitted as a pupil; but hewas almost always with us afterwards.  I was very unwilling to enterinto it, as you may imagine, without the knowledge and approbation ofhis mother; but I was too young, and loved him too well, to be soprudent as I ought to have been.-- Though you do not know him so wellas me, Miss Dashwood, you must have seen enough of him to be sensiblehe is very capable of making a woman sincerely attached to him.""Certainly," answered Elinor, without knowing what she said; but aftera moment's reflection, she added, with revived security of Edward'shonour and love, and her companion's falsehood--"Engaged to Mr. EdwardFerrars!--I confess myself so totally surprised at what you tell me,that really--I beg your pardon; but surely there must be some mistakeof person or name.  We cannot mean the same Mr. Ferrars.""We can mean no other," cried Lucy, smiling.  "Mr. Edward Ferrars, theeldest son of Mrs. Ferrars, of Park Street, and brother of yoursister-in-law, Mrs. John Dashwood, is the person I mean; you must allowthat I am not likely to be deceived as to the name of the man on whoall my happiness depends.""It is strange," replied Elinor, in a most painful perplexity, "that Ishould never have heard him even mention your name.""No; considering our situation, it was not strange.  Our first care hasbeen to keep the matter secret.-- You knew nothing of me, or my family,and, therefore, there could be no OCCASION for ever mentioning my nameto you; and, as he was always particularly afraid of his sister'ssuspecting any thing, THAT was reason enough for his not mentioning it."She was silent.--Elinor's security sunk; but her self-command did notsink with it."Four years you have been engaged," said she with a firm voice."Yes; and heaven knows how much longer we may have to wait.  PoorEdward!  It puts him quite out of heart." Then taking a small miniaturefrom her pocket, she added, "To prevent the possibility of mistake, beso good as to look at this face.  It does not do him justice, to besure, but yet I think you cannot be deceived as to the person it wasdrew for.--I have had it above these three years."She put it into her hands as she spoke; and when Elinor saw thepainting, whatever other doubts her fear of a too hasty decision, orher wish of detecting falsehood might suffer to linger in her mind, shecould have none of its being Edward's face.  She returned it almostinstantly, acknowledging the likeness."I have never been able," continued Lucy, "to give him my picture inreturn, which I am very much vexed at, for he has been always soanxious to get it!  But I am determined to set for it the very firstopportunity.""You are quite in the right," replied Elinor calmly.  They thenproceeded a few paces in silence.  Lucy spoke first."I am sure," said she, "I have no doubt in the world of your faithfullykeeping this secret, because you must know of what importance it is tous, not to have it reach his mother; for she would never approve of it,I dare say.  I shall have no fortune, and I fancy she is an exceedingproud woman.""I certainly did not seek your confidence," said Elinor; "but you do meno more than justice in imagining that I may be depended on.  Yoursecret is safe with me; but pardon me if I express some surprise at sounnecessary a communication.  You must at least have felt that my beingacquainted with it could not add to its safety."As she said this, she looked earnestly at Lucy, hoping to discoversomething in her countenance; perhaps the falsehood of the greatestpart of what she had been saying; but Lucy's countenance suffered nochange."I was afraid you would think I was taking a great liberty with you,"said she, "in telling you all this.  I have not known you long to besure, personally at least, but I have known you and all your family bydescription a great while; and as soon as I saw you, I felt almost asif you was an old acquaintance.  Besides in the present case, I reallythought some explanation was due to you after my making such particularinquiries about Edward's mother; and I am so unfortunate, that I havenot a creature whose advice I can ask.  Anne is the only person thatknows of it, and she has no judgment at all; indeed, she does me agreat deal more harm than good, for I am in constant fear of herbetraying me.  She does not know how to hold her tongue, as you mustperceive, and I am sure I was in the greatest fright in the worldt'other day, when Edward's name was mentioned by Sir John, lest sheshould out with it all.  You can't think how much I go through in mymind from it altogether.  I only wonder that I am alive after what Ihave suffered for Edward's sake these last four years.  Every thing insuch suspense and uncertainty; and seeing him so seldom--we can hardlymeet above twice a-year.  I am sure I wonder my heart is not quitebroke."Here she took out her handkerchief; but Elinor did not feel verycompassionate."Sometimes." continued Lucy, after wiping her eyes, "I think whether itwould not be better for us both to break off the matter entirely."  Asshe said this, she looked directly at her companion.  "But then atother times I have not resolution enough for it.-- I cannot bear thethoughts of making him so miserable, as I know the very mention of sucha thing would do.  And on my own account too--so dear as he is to me--Idon't think I could be equal to it.  What would you advise me to do insuch a case, Miss Dashwood?  What would you do yourself?""Pardon me," replied Elinor, startled by the question; "but I can giveyou no advice under such circumstances.  Your own judgment must directyou.""To be sure," continued Lucy, after a few minutes silence on bothsides, "his mother must provide for him sometime or other; but poorEdward is so cast down by it!  Did you not think him dreadfullow-spirited when he was at Barton?  He was so miserable when he leftus at Longstaple, to go to you, that I was afraid you would think himquite ill.""Did he come from your uncle's, then, when he visited us?""Oh, yes; he had been staying a fortnight with us.  Did you think hecame directly from town?""No," replied Elinor, most feelingly sensible of every freshcircumstance in favour of Lucy's veracity; "I remember he told us, thathe had been staying a fortnight with some friends near Plymouth." Sheremembered too, her own surprise at the time, at his mentioning nothingfarther of those friends, at his total silence with respect even totheir names."Did not you think him sadly out of spirits?" repeated Lucy."We did, indeed, particularly so when he first arrived.""I begged him to exert himself for fear you should suspect what was thematter; but it made him so melancholy, not being able to stay more thana fortnight with us, and seeing me so much affected.-- Poor fellow!--Iam afraid it is just the same with him now; for he writes in wretchedspirits.  I heard from him just before I left Exeter;" taking a letterfrom her pocket and carelessly showing the direction to Elinor.  "Youknow his hand, I dare say, a charming one it is; but that is notwritten so well as usual.--He was tired, I dare say, for he had justfilled the sheet to me as full as possible."Elinor saw that it WAS his hand, and she could doubt no longer.  Thispicture, she had allowed herself to believe, might have beenaccidentally obtained; it might not have been Edward's gift; but acorrespondence between them by letter, could subsist only under apositive engagement, could be authorised by nothing else; for a fewmoments, she was almost overcome--her heart sunk within her, and shecould hardly stand; but exertion was indispensably necessary; and shestruggled so resolutely against the oppression of her feelings, thather success was speedy, and for the time complete."Writing to each other," said Lucy, returning the letter into herpocket, "is the only comfort we have in such long separations.  Yes, Ihave one other comfort in his picture, but poor Edward has not evenTHAT.  If he had but my picture, he says he should be easy.  I gave hima lock of my hair set in a ring when he was at Longstaple last, andthat was some comfort to him, he said, but not equal to a picture.Perhaps you might notice the ring when you saw him?""I did," said Elinor, with a composure of voice, under which wasconcealed an emotion and distress beyond any thing she had ever feltbefore.  She was mortified, shocked, confounded.Fortunately for her, they had now reached the cottage, and theconversation could be continued no farther.  After sitting with them afew minutes, the Miss Steeles returned to the Park, and Elinor was thenat liberty to think and be wretched.[At this point in the first and second editions, Volume 1 ends.]However small Elinor's general dependence on Lucy's veracity might be,it was impossible for her on serious reflection to suspect it in thepresent case, where no temptation could be answerable to the folly ofinventing a falsehood of such a description.  What Lucy had asserted tobe true, therefore, Elinor could not, dared not longer doubt; supportedas it was too on every side by such probabilities and proofs, andcontradicted by nothing but her own wishes.  Their opportunity ofacquaintance in the house of Mr. Pratt was a foundation for the rest,at once indisputable and alarming; and Edward's visit near Plymouth,his melancholy state of mind, his dissatisfaction at his own prospects,his uncertain behaviour towards herself, the intimate knowledge of theMiss Steeles as to Norland and their family connections, which hadoften surprised her, the picture, the letter, the ring, formedaltogether such a body of evidence, as overcame every fear ofcondemning him unfairly, and established as a fact, which no partialitycould set aside, his ill-treatment of herself.--Her resentment of suchbehaviour, her indignation at having been its dupe, for a short timemade her feel only for herself; but other ideas, other considerations,soon arose.  Had Edward been intentionally deceiving her?  Had hefeigned a regard for her which he did not feel?  Was his engagement toLucy an engagement of the heart?  No; whatever it might once have been,she could not believe it such at present.  His affection was all herown.  She could not be deceived in that.  Her mother, sisters, Fanny,all had been conscious of his regard for her at Norland; it was not anillusion of her own vanity.  He certainly loved her.  What a softenerof the heart was this persuasion!  How much could it not tempt her toforgive!  He had been blamable, highly blamable, in remaining atNorland after he first felt her influence over him to be more than itought to be.  In that, he could not be defended; but if he had injuredher, how much more had he injured himself; if her case were pitiable,his was hopeless.  His imprudence had made her miserable for a while;but it seemed to have deprived himself of all chance of ever beingotherwise.  She might in time regain tranquillity; but HE, what had heto look forward to?  Could he ever be tolerably happy with Lucy Steele;could he, were his affection for herself out of the question, with hisintegrity, his delicacy, and well-informed mind, be satisfied with awife like her--illiterate, artful, and selfish?The youthful infatuation of nineteen would naturally blind him to everything but her beauty and good nature; but the four succeedingyears--years, which if rationally spent, give such improvement to theunderstanding, must have opened his eyes to her defects of education,while the same period of time, spent on her side in inferior societyand more frivolous pursuits, had perhaps robbed her of that simplicitywhich might once have given an interesting character to her beauty.If in the supposition of his seeking to marry herself, his difficultiesfrom his mother had seemed great, how much greater were they now likelyto be, when the object of his engagement was undoubtedly inferior inconnections, and probably inferior in fortune to herself.  Thesedifficulties, indeed, with a heart so alienated from Lucy, might notpress very hard upon his patience; but melancholy was the state of theperson by whom the expectation of family opposition and unkindness,could be felt as a relief!As these considerations occurred to her in painful succession, she weptfor him, more than for herself.  Supported by the conviction of havingdone nothing to merit her present unhappiness, and consoled by thebelief that Edward had done nothing to forfeit her esteem, she thoughtshe could even now, under the first smart of the heavy blow, commandherself enough to guard every suspicion of the truth from her motherand sisters.  And so well was she able to answer her own expectations,that when she joined them at dinner only two hours after she had firstsuffered the extinction of all her dearest hopes, no one would havesupposed from the appearance of the sisters, that Elinor was mourningin secret over obstacles which must divide her for ever from the objectof her love, and that Marianne was internally dwelling on theperfections of a man, of whose whole heart she felt thoroughlypossessed, and whom she expected to see in every carriage which drovenear their house.The necessity of concealing from her mother and Marianne, what had beenentrusted in confidence to herself, though it obliged her to unceasingexertion, was no aggravation of Elinor's distress.  On the contrary itwas a relief to her, to be spared the communication of what would givesuch affliction to them, and to be saved likewise from hearing thatcondemnation of Edward, which would probably flow from the excess oftheir partial affection for herself, and which was more than she feltequal to support.From their counsel, or their conversation, she knew she could receiveno assistance, their tenderness and sorrow must add to her distress,while her self-command would neither receive encouragement from theirexample nor from their praise.  She was stronger alone, and her owngood sense so well supported her, that her firmness was as unshaken,her appearance of cheerfulness as invariable, as with regrets sopoignant and so fresh, it was possible for them to be.Much as she had suffered from her first conversation with Lucy on thesubject, she soon felt an earnest wish of renewing it; and this formore reasons than one.  She wanted to hear many particulars of theirengagement repeated again, she wanted more clearly to understand whatLucy really felt for Edward, whether there were any sincerity in herdeclaration of tender regard for him, and she particularly wanted toconvince Lucy, by her readiness to enter on the matter again, and hercalmness in conversing on it, that she was no otherwise interested init than as a friend, which she very much feared her involuntaryagitation, in their morning discourse, must have left at leastdoubtful.  That Lucy was disposed to be jealous of her appeared veryprobable: it was plain that Edward had always spoken highly in herpraise, not merely from Lucy's assertion, but from her venturing totrust her on so short a personal acquaintance, with a secret soconfessedly and evidently important.  And even Sir John's jokingintelligence must have had some weight.  But indeed, while Elinorremained so well assured within herself of being really beloved byEdward, it required no other consideration of probabilities to make itnatural that Lucy should be jealous; and that she was so, her veryconfidence was a proof.  What other reason for the disclosure of theaffair could there be, but that Elinor might be informed by it ofLucy's superior claims on Edward, and be taught to avoid him in future?She had little difficulty in understanding thus much of her rival'sintentions, and while she was firmly resolved to act by her as everyprinciple of honour and honesty directed, to combat her own affectionfor Edward and to see him as little as possible; she could not denyherself the comfort of endeavouring to convince Lucy that her heart wasunwounded.  And as she could now have nothing more painful to hear onthe subject than had already been told, she did not mistrust her ownability of going through a repetition of particulars with composure.But it was not immediately that an opportunity of doing so could becommanded, though Lucy was as well disposed as herself to takeadvantage of any that occurred; for the weather was not often fineenough to allow of their joining in a walk, where they might mosteasily separate themselves from the others; and though they met atleast every other evening either at the park or cottage, and chiefly atthe former, they could not be supposed to meet for the sake ofconversation.  Such a thought would never enter either Sir John or LadyMiddleton's head; and therefore very little leisure was ever given fora general chat, and none at all for particular discourse.  They met forthe sake of eating, drinking, and laughing together, playing at cards,or consequences, or any other game that was sufficiently noisy.One or two meetings of this kind had taken place, without affordingElinor any chance of engaging Lucy in private, when Sir John called atthe cottage one morning, to beg, in the name of charity, that theywould all dine with Lady Middleton that day, as he was obliged toattend the club at Exeter, and she would otherwise be quite alone,except her mother and the two Miss Steeles.  Elinor, who foresaw afairer opening for the point she had in view, in such a party as thiswas likely to be, more at liberty among themselves under the tranquiland well-bred direction of Lady Middleton than when her husband unitedthem together in one noisy purpose, immediately accepted theinvitation; Margaret, with her mother's permission, was equallycompliant, and Marianne, though always unwilling to join any of theirparties, was persuaded by her mother, who could not bear to have herseclude herself from any chance of amusement, to go likewise.The young ladies went, and Lady Middleton was happily preserved fromthe frightful solitude which had threatened her.  The insipidity of themeeting was exactly such as Elinor had expected; it produced not onenovelty of thought or expression, and nothing could be less interestingthan the whole of their discourse both in the dining parlour anddrawing room: to the latter, the children accompanied them, and whilethey remained there, she was too well convinced of the impossibility ofengaging Lucy's attention to attempt it.  They quitted it only with theremoval of the tea-things.  The card-table was then placed, and Elinorbegan to wonder at herself for having ever entertained a hope offinding time for conversation at the park.  They all rose up inpreparation for a round game."I am glad," said Lady Middleton to Lucy, "you are not going to finishpoor little Annamaria's basket this evening; for I am sure it must hurtyour eyes to work filigree by candlelight.  And we will make the dearlittle love some amends for her disappointment to-morrow, and then Ihope she will not much mind it."This hint was enough, Lucy recollected herself instantly and replied,"Indeed you are very much mistaken, Lady Middleton; I am only waitingto know whether you can make your party without me, or I should havebeen at my filigree already.  I would not disappoint the little angelfor all the world: and if you want me at the card-table now, I amresolved to finish the basket after supper.""You are very good, I hope it won't hurt your eyes--will you ring thebell for some working candles?  My poor little girl would be sadlydisappointed, I know, if the basket was not finished tomorrow, forthough I told her it certainly would not, I am sure she depends uponhaving it done."Lucy directly drew her work table near her and reseated herself with analacrity and cheerfulness which seemed to infer that she could taste nogreater delight than in making a filigree basket for a spoilt child.Lady Middleton proposed a rubber of Casino to the others.  No one madeany objection but Marianne, who with her usual inattention to the formsof general civility, exclaimed, "Your Ladyship will have the goodnessto excuse ME--you know I detest cards.  I shall go to the piano-forte;I have not touched it since it was tuned."  And without fartherceremony, she turned away and walked to the instrument.Lady Middleton looked as if she thanked heaven that SHE had never madeso rude a speech."Marianne can never keep long from that instrument you know, ma'am,"said Elinor, endeavouring to smooth away the offence; "and I do notmuch wonder at it; for it is the very best toned piano-forte I everheard."The remaining five were now to draw their cards."Perhaps," continued Elinor, "if I should happen to cut out, I may beof some use to Miss Lucy Steele, in rolling her papers for her; andthere is so much still to be done to the basket, that it must beimpossible I think for her labour singly, to finish it this evening.  Ishould like the work exceedingly, if she would allow me a share in it.""Indeed I shall be very much obliged to you for your help," cried Lucy,"for I find there is more to be done to it than I thought there was;and it would be a shocking thing to disappoint dear Annamaria afterall.""Oh! that would be terrible, indeed," said Miss Steele-- "Dear littlesoul, how I do love her!""You are very kind," said Lady Middleton to Elinor; "and as you reallylike the work, perhaps you will be as well pleased not to cut in tillanother rubber, or will you take your chance now?"Elinor joyfully profited by the first of these proposals, and thus by alittle of that address which Marianne could never condescend topractise, gained her own end, and pleased Lady Middleton at the sametime.  Lucy made room for her with ready attention, and the two fairrivals were thus seated side by side at the same table, and, with theutmost harmony, engaged in forwarding the same work.  The pianoforte atwhich Marianne, wrapped up in her own music and her own thoughts, hadby this time forgotten that any body was in the room besides herself,was luckily so near them that Miss Dashwood now judged she mightsafely, under the shelter of its noise, introduce the interestingsubject, without any risk of being heard at the card-table.In a firm, though cautious tone, Elinor thus began."I should be undeserving of the confidence you have honoured me with,if I felt no desire for its continuance, or no farther curiosity on itssubject.  I will not apologize therefore for bringing it forward again.""Thank you," cried Lucy warmly, "for breaking the ice; you have set myheart at ease by it; for I was somehow or other afraid I had offendedyou by what I told you that Monday.""Offended me! How could you suppose so? Believe me," and Elinor spokeit with the truest sincerity, "nothing could be farther from myintention than to give you such an idea.  Could you have a motive forthe trust, that was not honourable and flattering to me?""And yet I do assure you," replied Lucy, her little sharp eyes full ofmeaning, "there seemed to me to be a coldness and displeasure in yourmanner that made me quite uncomfortable.  I felt sure that you wasangry with me; and have been quarrelling with myself ever since, forhaving took such a liberty as to trouble you with my affairs.  But I amvery glad to find it was only my own fancy, and that you really do notblame me.  If you knew what a consolation it was to me to relieve myheart speaking to you of what I am always thinking of every moment ofmy life, your compassion would make you overlook every thing else I amsure.""Indeed, I can easily believe that it was a very great relief to you,to acknowledge your situation to me, and be assured that you shallnever have reason to repent it.  Your case is a very unfortunate one;you seem to me to be surrounded with difficulties, and you will haveneed of all your mutual affection to support you under them.  Mr.Ferrars, I believe, is entirely dependent on his mother.""He has only two thousand pounds of his own; it would be madness tomarry upon that, though for my own part, I could give up every prospectof more without a sigh.  I have been always used to a very smallincome, and could struggle with any poverty for him; but I love him toowell to be the selfish means of robbing him, perhaps, of all that hismother might give him if he married to please her.  We must wait, itmay be for many years.  With almost every other man in the world, itwould be an alarming prospect; but Edward's affection and constancynothing can deprive me of I know.""That conviction must be every thing to you; and he is undoubtedlysupported by the same trust in your's.  If the strength of yourreciprocal attachment had failed, as between many people, and undermany circumstances it naturally would during a four years' engagement,your situation would have been pitiable, indeed."Lucy here looked up; but Elinor was careful in guarding her countenancefrom every expression that could give her words a suspicious tendency."Edward's love for me," said Lucy, "has been pretty well put to thetest, by our long, very long absence since we were first engaged, andit has stood the trial so well, that I should be unpardonable to doubtit now.  I can safely say that he has never gave me one moment's alarmon that account from the first."Elinor hardly knew whether to smile or sigh at this assertion.Lucy went on.  "I am rather of a jealous temper too by nature, and fromour different situations in life, from his being so much more in theworld than me, and our continual separation, I was enough inclined forsuspicion, to have found out the truth in an instant, if there had beenthe slightest alteration in his behaviour to me when we met, or anylowness of spirits that I could not account for, or if he had talkedmore of one lady than another, or seemed in any respect less happy atLongstaple than he used to be.  I do not mean to say that I amparticularly observant or quick-sighted in general, but in such a caseI am sure I could not be deceived.""All this," thought Elinor, "is very pretty; but it can impose uponneither of us.""But what," said she after a short silence, "are your views? or haveyou none but that of waiting for Mrs. Ferrars's death, which is amelancholy and shocking extremity?--Is her son determined to submit tothis, and to all the tediousness of the many years of suspense in whichit may involve you, rather than run the risk of her displeasure for awhile by owning the truth?""If we could be certain that it would be only for a while!  But Mrs.Ferrars is a very headstrong proud woman, and in her first fit of angerupon hearing it, would very likely secure every thing to Robert, andthe idea of that, for Edward's sake, frightens away all my inclinationfor hasty measures.""And for your own sake too, or you are carrying your disinterestednessbeyond reason."Lucy looked at Elinor again, and was silent."Do you know Mr. Robert Ferrars?" asked Elinor."Not at all--I never saw him; but I fancy he is very unlike hisbrother--silly and a great coxcomb.""A great coxcomb!" repeated Miss Steele, whose ear had caught thosewords by a sudden pause in Marianne's music.-- "Oh, they are talking oftheir favourite beaux, I dare say.""No sister," cried Lucy, "you are mistaken there, our favourite beauxare NOT great coxcombs.""I can answer for it that Miss Dashwood's is not," said Mrs. Jennings,laughing heartily; "for he is one of the modestest, prettiest behavedyoung men I ever saw; but as for Lucy, she is such a sly littlecreature, there is no finding out who SHE likes.""Oh," cried Miss Steele, looking significantly round at them, "I daresay Lucy's beau is quite as modest and pretty behaved as MissDashwood's."Elinor blushed in spite of herself.  Lucy bit her lip, and lookedangrily at her sister.  A mutual silence took place for some time.Lucy first put an end to it by saying in a lower tone, though Mariannewas then giving them the powerful protection of a very magnificentconcerto--"I will honestly tell you of one scheme which has lately come into myhead, for bringing matters to bear; indeed I am bound to let you intothe secret, for you are a party concerned.  I dare say you have seenenough of Edward to know that he would prefer the church to every otherprofession; now my plan is that he should take orders as soon as hecan, and then through your interest, which I am sure you would be kindenough to use out of friendship for him, and I hope out of some regardto me, your brother might be persuaded to give him Norland living;which I understand is a very good one, and the present incumbent notlikely to live a great while.  That would be enough for us to marryupon, and we might trust to time and chance for the rest.""I should always be happy," replied Elinor, "to show any mark of myesteem and friendship for Mr. Ferrars; but do you not perceive that myinterest on such an occasion would be perfectly unnecessary?  He isbrother to Mrs. John Dashwood--THAT must be recommendation enough toher husband.""But Mrs. John Dashwood would not much approve of Edward's going intoorders.""Then I rather suspect that my interest would do very little."They were again silent for many minutes.  At length Lucy exclaimed witha deep sigh,"I believe it would be the wisest way to put an end to the business atonce by dissolving the engagement.  We seem so beset with difficultieson every side, that though it would make us miserable for a time, weshould be happier perhaps in the end.  But you will not give me youradvice, Miss Dashwood?""No," answered Elinor, with a smile, which concealed very agitatedfeelings, "on such a subject I certainly will not.  You know very wellthat my opinion would have no weight with you, unless it were on theside of your wishes.""Indeed you wrong me," replied Lucy, with great solemnity; "I knownobody of whose judgment I think so highly as I do of yours; and I doreally believe, that if you was to say to me, 'I advise you by allmeans to put an end to your engagement with Edward Ferrars, it will bemore for the happiness of both of you,' I should resolve upon doing itimmediately."Elinor blushed for the insincerity of Edward's future wife, andreplied, "This compliment would effectually frighten me from giving anyopinion on the subject had I formed one.  It raises my influence muchtoo high; the power of dividing two people so tenderly attached is toomuch for an indifferent person.""'Tis because you are an indifferent person," said Lucy, with somepique, and laying a particular stress on those words, "that yourjudgment might justly have such weight with me.  If you could besupposed to be biased in any respect by your own feelings, your opinionwould not be worth having."Elinor thought it wisest to make no answer to this, lest they mightprovoke each other to an unsuitable increase of ease and unreserve; andwas even partly determined never to mention the subject again.  Anotherpause therefore of many minutes' duration, succeeded this speech, andLucy was still the first to end it."Shall you be in town this winter, Miss Dashwood?" said she with allher accustomary complacency."Certainly not.""I am sorry for that," returned the other, while her eyes brightened atthe information, "it would have gave me such pleasure to meet youthere!  But I dare say you will go for all that.  To be sure, yourbrother and sister will ask you to come to them.""It will not be in my power to accept their invitation if they do.""How unlucky that is! I had quite depended upon meeting you there.Anne and me are to go the latter end of January to some relations whohave been wanting us to visit them these several years!  But I only gofor the sake of seeing Edward.  He will be there in February, otherwiseLondon would have no charms for me; I have not spirits for it."Elinor was soon called to the card-table by the conclusion of the firstrubber, and the confidential discourse of the two ladies was thereforeat an end, to which both of them submitted without any reluctance, fornothing had been said on either side to make them dislike each otherless than they had done before; and Elinor sat down to the card tablewith the melancholy persuasion that Edward was not only withoutaffection for the person who was to be his wife; but that he had noteven the chance of being tolerably happy in marriage, which sincereaffection on HER side would have given, for self-interest alone couldinduce a woman to keep a man to an engagement, of which she seemed sothoroughly aware that he was weary.From this time the subject was never revived by Elinor, and whenentered on by Lucy, who seldom missed an opportunity of introducing it,and was particularly careful to inform her confidante, of her happinesswhenever she received a letter from Edward, it was treated by theformer with calmness and caution, and dismissed as soon as civilitywould allow; for she felt such conversations to be an indulgence whichLucy did not deserve, and which were dangerous to herself.The visit of the Miss Steeles at Barton Park was lengthened far beyondwhat the first invitation implied.  Their favour increased; they couldnot be spared; Sir John would not hear of their going; and in spite oftheir numerous and long arranged engagements in Exeter, in spite of theabsolute necessity of returning to fulfill them immediately, which wasin full force at the end of every week, they were prevailed on to staynearly two months at the park, and to assist in the due celebration ofthat festival which requires a more than ordinary share of privateballs and large dinners to proclaim its importance.Though Mrs. Jennings was in the habit of spending a large portion ofthe year at the houses of her children and friends, she was not withouta settled habitation of her own.  Since the death of her husband, whohad traded with success in a less elegant part of the town, she hadresided every winter in a house in one of the streets near PortmanSquare.  Towards this home, she began on the approach of January toturn her thoughts, and thither she one day abruptly, and veryunexpectedly by them, asked the elder Misses Dashwood to accompany her.Elinor, without observing the varying complexion of her sister, and theanimated look which spoke no indifference to the plan, immediately gavea grateful but absolute denial for both, in which she believed herselfto be speaking their united inclinations.  The reason alleged was theirdetermined resolution of not leaving their mother at that time of theyear.  Mrs. Jennings received the refusal with some surprise, andrepeated her invitation immediately."Oh, Lord! I am sure your mother can spare you very well, and I DO begyou will favour me with your company, for I've quite set my heart uponit.  Don't fancy that you will be any inconvenience to me, for I shan'tput myself at all out of my way for you.  It will only be sending Bettyby the coach, and I hope I can afford THAT.  We three shall be able togo very well in my chaise; and when we are in town, if you do not liketo go wherever I do, well and good, you may always go with one of mydaughters.  I am sure your mother will not object to it; for I have hadsuch good luck in getting my own children off my hands that she willthink me a very fit person to have the charge of you; and if I don'tget one of you at least well married before I have done with you, itshall not be my fault.  I shall speak a good word for you to all theyoung men, you may depend upon it.""I have a notion," said Sir John, "that Miss Marianne would not objectto such a scheme, if her elder sister would come into it.  It is veryhard indeed that she should not have a little pleasure, because MissDashwood does not wish it.  So I would advise you two, to set off fortown, when you are tired of Barton, without saying a word to MissDashwood about it.""Nay," cried Mrs. Jennings, "I am sure I shall be monstrous glad ofMiss Marianne's company, whether Miss Dashwood will go or not, only themore the merrier say I, and I thought it would be more comfortable forthem to be together; because, if they got tired of me, they might talkto one another, and laugh at my old ways behind my back.  But one orthe other, if not both of them, I must have.  Lord bless me! how do youthink I can live poking by myself, I who have been always used tillthis winter to have Charlotte with me.  Come, Miss Marianne, let usstrike hands upon the bargain, and if Miss Dashwood will change hermind by and bye, why so much the better.""I thank you, ma'am, sincerely thank you," said Marianne, with warmth:"your invitation has insured my gratitude for ever, and it would giveme such happiness, yes, almost the greatest happiness I am capable of,to be able to accept it.  But my mother, my dearest, kindest mother,--Ifeel the justice of what Elinor has urged, and if she were to be madeless happy, less comfortable by our absence--Oh! no, nothing shouldtempt me to leave her.  It should not, must not be a struggle."Mrs. Jennings repeated her assurance that Mrs. Dashwood could sparethem perfectly well; and Elinor, who now understood her sister, and sawto what indifference to almost every thing else she was carried by hereagerness to be with Willoughby again, made no farther directopposition to the plan, and merely referred it to her mother'sdecision, from whom however she scarcely expected to receive anysupport in her endeavour to prevent a visit, which she could notapprove of for Marianne, and which on her own account she hadparticular reasons to avoid.  Whatever Marianne was desirous of, hermother would be eager to promote--she could not expect to influence thelatter to cautiousness of conduct in an affair respecting which she hadnever been able to inspire her with distrust; and she dared not explainthe motive of her own disinclination for going to London.  ThatMarianne, fastidious as she was, thoroughly acquainted with Mrs.Jennings' manners, and invariably disgusted by them, should overlookevery inconvenience of that kind, should disregard whatever must bemost wounding to her irritable feelings, in her pursuit of one object,was such a proof, so strong, so full, of the importance of that objectto her, as Elinor, in spite of all that had passed, was not prepared towitness.On being informed of the invitation, Mrs. Dashwood, persuaded that suchan excursion would be productive of much amusement to both herdaughters, and perceiving through all her affectionate attention toherself, how much the heart of Marianne was in it, would not hear oftheir declining the offer upon HER account; insisted on their bothaccepting it directly; and then began to foresee, with her usualcheerfulness, a variety of advantages that would accrue to them all,from this separation."I am delighted with the plan," she cried, "it is exactly what I couldwish.  Margaret and I shall be as much benefited by it as yourselves.When you and the Middletons are gone, we shall go on so quietly andhappily together with our books and our music! You will find Margaretso improved when you come back again!  I have a little plan ofalteration for your bedrooms too, which may now be performed withoutany inconvenience to any one.  It is very right that you SHOULD go totown; I would have every young woman of your condition in lifeacquainted with the manners and amusements of London.  You will beunder the care of a motherly good sort of woman, of whose kindness toyou I can have no doubt.  And in all probability you will see yourbrother, and whatever may be his faults, or the faults of his wife,when I consider whose son he is, I cannot bear to have you so whollyestranged from each other.""Though with your usual anxiety for our happiness," said Elinor, "youhave been obviating every impediment to the present scheme whichoccurred to you, there is still one objection which, in my opinion,cannot be so easily removed."Marianne's countenance sunk."And what," said Mrs. Dashwood, "is my dear prudent Elinor going tosuggest?  What formidable obstacle is she now to bring forward?  Do letme hear a word about the expense of it.""My objection is this; though I think very well of Mrs. Jennings'sheart, she is not a woman whose society can afford us pleasure, orwhose protection will give us consequence.""That is very true," replied her mother, "but of her society,separately from that of other people, you will scarcely have any thingat all, and you will almost always appear in public with LadyMiddleton.""If Elinor is frightened away by her dislike of Mrs. Jennings," saidMarianne, "at least it need not prevent MY accepting her invitation.  Ihave no such scruples, and I am sure I could put up with everyunpleasantness of that kind with very little effort."Elinor could not help smiling at this display of indifference towardsthe manners of a person, to whom she had often had difficulty inpersuading Marianne to behave with tolerable politeness; and resolvedwithin herself, that if her sister persisted in going, she would golikewise, as she did not think it proper that Marianne should be leftto the sole guidance of her own judgment, or that Mrs. Jennings shouldbe abandoned to the mercy of Marianne for all the comfort of herdomestic hours.  To this determination she was the more easilyreconciled, by recollecting that Edward Ferrars, by Lucy's account, wasnot to be in town before February; and that their visit, without anyunreasonable abridgement, might be previously finished."I will have you BOTH go," said Mrs. Dashwood; "these objections arenonsensical.  You will have much pleasure in being in London, andespecially in being together; and if Elinor would ever condescend toanticipate enjoyment, she would foresee it there from a variety ofsources; she would, perhaps, expect some from improving heracquaintance with her sister-in-law's family."Elinor had often wished for an opportunity of attempting to weaken hermother's dependence on the attachment of Edward and herself, that theshock might be less when the whole truth were revealed, and now on thisattack, though almost hopeless of success, she forced herself to beginher design by saying, as calmly as she could, "I like Edward Ferrarsvery much, and shall always be glad to see him; but as to the rest ofthe family, it is a matter of perfect indifference to me, whether I amever known to them or not."Mrs. Dashwood smiled, and said nothing.  Marianne lifted up her eyes inastonishment, and Elinor conjectured that she might as well have heldher tongue.After very little farther discourse, it was finally settled that theinvitation should be fully accepted.  Mrs. Jennings received theinformation with a great deal of joy, and many assurances of kindnessand care; nor was it a matter of pleasure merely to her.  Sir John wasdelighted; for to a man, whose prevailing anxiety was the dread ofbeing alone, the acquisition of two, to the number of inhabitants inLondon, was something.  Even Lady Middleton took the trouble of beingdelighted, which was putting herself rather out of her way; and as forthe Miss Steeles, especially Lucy, they had never been so happy intheir lives as this intelligence made them.Elinor submitted to the arrangement which counteracted her wishes withless reluctance than she had expected to feel.  With regard to herself,it was now a matter of unconcern whether she went to town or not, andwhen she saw her mother so thoroughly pleased with the plan, and hersister exhilarated by it in look, voice, and manner, restored to allher usual animation, and elevated to more than her usual gaiety, shecould not be dissatisfied with the cause, and would hardly allowherself to distrust the consequence.Marianne's joy was almost a degree beyond happiness, so great was theperturbation of her spirits and her impatience to be gone.  Herunwillingness to quit her mother was her only restorative to calmness;and at the moment of parting her grief on that score was excessive.Her mother's affliction was hardly less, and Elinor was the only one ofthe three, who seemed to consider the separation as any thing short ofeternal.Their departure took place in the first week in January.  TheMiddletons were to follow in about a week.  The Miss Steeles kept theirstation at the park, and were to quit it only with the rest of thefamily.Elinor could not find herself in the carriage with Mrs. Jennings, andbeginning a journey to London under her protection, and as her guest,without wondering at her own situation, so short had their acquaintancewith that lady been, so wholly unsuited were they in age anddisposition, and so many had been her objections against such a measureonly a few days before! But these objections had all, with that happyardour of youth which Marianne and her mother equally shared, beenovercome or overlooked; and Elinor, in spite of every occasional doubtof Willoughby's constancy, could not witness the rapture of delightfulexpectation which filled the whole soul and beamed in the eyes ofMarianne, without feeling how blank was her own prospect, how cheerlessher own state of mind in the comparison, and how gladly she wouldengage in the solicitude of Marianne's situation to have the sameanimating object in view, the same possibility of hope.  A short, avery short time however must now decide what Willoughby's intentionswere; in all probability he was already in town.  Marianne's eagernessto be gone declared her dependence on finding him there; and Elinor wasresolved not only upon gaining every new light as to his characterwhich her own observation or the intelligence of others could give her,but likewise upon watching his behaviour to her sister with suchzealous attention, as to ascertain what he was and what he meant,before many meetings had taken place.  Should the result of herobservations be unfavourable, she was determined at all events to openthe eyes of her sister; should it be otherwise, her exertions would beof a different nature--she must then learn to avoid every selfishcomparison, and banish every regret which might lessen her satisfactionin the happiness of Marianne.They were three days on their journey, and Marianne's behaviour as theytravelled was a happy specimen of what future complaisance andcompanionableness to Mrs. Jennings might be expected to be.  She sat insilence almost all the way, wrapt in her own meditations, and scarcelyever voluntarily speaking, except when any object of picturesque beautywithin their view drew from her an exclamation of delight exclusivelyaddressed to her sister.  To atone for this conduct therefore, Elinortook immediate possession of the post of civility which she hadassigned herself, behaved with the greatest attention to Mrs. Jennings,talked with her, laughed with her, and listened to her whenever shecould; and Mrs. Jennings on her side treated them both with allpossible kindness, was solicitous on every occasion for their ease andenjoyment, and only disturbed that she could not make them choose theirown dinners at the inn, nor extort a confession of their preferringsalmon to cod, or boiled fowls to veal cutlets.  They reached town bythree o'clock the third day, glad to be released, after such a journey,from the confinement of a carriage, and ready to enjoy all the luxuryof a good fire.The house was handsome, and handsomely fitted up, and the young ladieswere immediately put in possession of a very comfortable apartment.  Ithad formerly been Charlotte's, and over the mantelpiece still hung alandscape in coloured silks of her performance, in proof of her havingspent seven years at a great school in town to some effect.As dinner was not to be ready in less than two hours from theirarrival, Elinor determined to employ the interval in writing to hermother, and sat down for that purpose.  In a few moments Marianne didthe same.  "I am writing home, Marianne," said Elinor; "had not youbetter defer your letter for a day or two?""I am NOT going to write to my mother," replied Marianne, hastily, andas if wishing to avoid any farther inquiry.  Elinor said no more; itimmediately struck her that she must then be writing to Willoughby; andthe conclusion which as instantly followed was, that, howevermysteriously they might wish to conduct the affair, they must beengaged.  This conviction, though not entirely satisfactory, gave herpleasure, and she continued her letter with greater alacrity.Marianne's was finished in a very few minutes; in length it could be nomore than a note; it was then folded up, sealed, and directed witheager rapidity.  Elinor thought she could distinguish a large W in thedirection; and no sooner was it complete than Marianne, ringing thebell, requested the footman who answered it to get that letter conveyedfor her to the two-penny post.  This decided the matter at once.Her spirits still continued very high; but there was a flutter in themwhich prevented their giving much pleasure to her sister, and thisagitation increased as the evening drew on.  She could scarcely eat anydinner, and when they afterwards returned to the drawing room, seemedanxiously listening to the sound of every carriage.It was a great satisfaction to Elinor that Mrs. Jennings, by being muchengaged in her own room, could see little of what was passing.  The teathings were brought in, and already had Marianne been disappointed morethan once by a rap at a neighbouring door, when a loud one was suddenlyheard which could not be mistaken for one at any other house, Elinorfelt secure of its announcing Willoughby's approach, and Marianne,starting up, moved towards the door.  Every thing was silent; thiscould not be borne many seconds; she opened the door, advanced a fewsteps towards the stairs, and after listening half a minute, returnedinto the room in all the agitation which a conviction of having heardhim would naturally produce; in the ecstasy of her feelings at thatinstant she could not help exclaiming, "Oh, Elinor, it is Willoughby,indeed it is!" and seemed almost ready to throw herself into his arms,when Colonel Brandon appeared.It was too great a shock to be borne with calmness, and she immediatelyleft the room.  Elinor was disappointed too; but at the same time herregard for Colonel Brandon ensured his welcome with her; and she feltparticularly hurt that a man so partial to her sister should perceivethat she experienced nothing but grief and disappointment in seeinghim.  She instantly saw that it was not unnoticed by him, that he evenobserved Marianne as she quitted the room, with such astonishment andconcern, as hardly left him the recollection of what civility demandedtowards herself."Is your sister ill?" said he.Elinor answered in some distress that she was, and then talked ofhead-aches, low spirits, and over fatigues; and of every thing to whichshe could decently attribute her sister's behaviour.He heard her with the most earnest attention, but seeming to recollecthimself, said no more on the subject, and began directly to speak ofhis pleasure at seeing them in London, making the usual inquiries abouttheir journey, and the friends they had left behind.In this calm kind of way, with very little interest on either side,they continued to talk, both of them out of spirits, and the thoughtsof both engaged elsewhere.  Elinor wished very much to ask whetherWilloughby were then in town, but she was afraid of giving him pain byany enquiry after his rival; and at length, by way of saying something,she asked if he had been in London ever since she had seen him last."Yes," he replied, with some embarrassment, "almost ever since; I havebeen once or twice at Delaford for a few days, but it has never been inmy power to return to Barton."This, and the manner in which it was said, immediately brought back toher remembrance all the circumstances of his quitting that place, withthe uneasiness and suspicions they had caused to Mrs. Jennings, and shewas fearful that her question had implied much more curiosity on thesubject than she had ever felt.Mrs. Jennings soon came in.  "Oh! Colonel," said she, with her usualnoisy cheerfulness, "I am monstrous glad to see you--sorry I could notcome before--beg your pardon, but I have been forced to look about me alittle, and settle my matters; for it is a long while since I have beenat home, and you know one has always a world of little odd things to doafter one has been away for any time; and then I have had Cartwright tosettle with-- Lord, I have been as busy as a bee ever since dinner!But pray, Colonel, how came you to conjure out that I should be in towntoday?""I had the pleasure of hearing it at Mr. Palmer's, where I have beendining.""Oh, you did; well, and how do they all do at their house?  How doesCharlotte do?  I warrant you she is a fine size by this time.""Mrs. Palmer appeared quite well, and I am commissioned to tell you,that you will certainly see her to-morrow.""Ay, to be sure, I thought as much.  Well, Colonel, I have brought twoyoung ladies with me, you see--that is, you see but one of them now,but there is another somewhere.  Your friend, Miss Marianne, too--whichyou will not be sorry to hear.  I do not know what you and Mr.Willoughby will do between you about her.  Ay, it is a fine thing to beyoung and handsome.  Well! I was young once, but I never was veryhandsome--worse luck for me.  However, I got a very good husband, and Idon't know what the greatest beauty can do more.  Ah! poor man! he hasbeen dead these eight years and better.  But Colonel, where have youbeen to since we parted?  And how does your business go on?  Come,come, let's have no secrets among friends."He replied with his accustomary mildness to all her inquiries, butwithout satisfying her in any.  Elinor now began to make the tea, andMarianne was obliged to appear again.After her entrance, Colonel Brandon became more thoughtful and silentthan he had been before, and Mrs. Jennings could not prevail on him tostay long.  No other visitor appeared that evening, and the ladies wereunanimous in agreeing to go early to bed.Marianne rose the next morning with recovered spirits and happy looks.The disappointment of the evening before seemed forgotten in theexpectation of what was to happen that day.  They had not long finishedtheir breakfast before Mrs. Palmer's barouche stopped at the door, andin a few minutes she came laughing into the room: so delighted to seethem all, that it was hard to say whether she received most pleasurefrom meeting her mother or the Miss Dashwoods again.  So surprised attheir coming to town, though it was what she had rather expected allalong; so angry at their accepting her mother's invitation after havingdeclined her own, though at the same time she would never have forgiventhem if they had not come!"Mr. Palmer will be so happy to see you," said she; "What do you thinkhe said when he heard of your coming with Mama?  I forget what it wasnow, but it was something so droll!"After an hour or two spent in what her mother called comfortable chat,or in other words, in every variety of inquiry concerning all theiracquaintance on Mrs. Jennings's side, and in laughter without cause onMrs. Palmer's, it was proposed by the latter that they should allaccompany her to some shops where she had business that morning, towhich Mrs. Jennings and Elinor readily consented, as having likewisesome purchases to make themselves; and Marianne, though declining it atfirst was induced to go likewise.Wherever they went, she was evidently always on the watch.  In BondStreet especially, where much of their business lay, her eyes were inconstant inquiry; and in whatever shop the party were engaged, her mindwas equally abstracted from every thing actually before them, from allthat interested and occupied the others.  Restless and dissatisfiedevery where, her sister could never obtain her opinion of any articleof purchase, however it might equally concern them both: she receivedno pleasure from anything; was only impatient to be at home again, andcould with difficulty govern her vexation at the tediousness of Mrs.Palmer, whose eye was caught by every thing pretty, expensive, or new;who was wild to buy all, could determine on none, and dawdled away hertime in rapture and indecision.It was late in the morning before they returned home; and no sooner hadthey entered the house than Marianne flew eagerly up stairs, and whenElinor followed, she found her turning from the table with a sorrowfulcountenance, which declared that no Willoughby had been there."Has no letter been left here for me since we went out?" said she tothe footman who then entered with the parcels.  She was answered in thenegative.  "Are you quite sure of it?" she replied.  "Are you certainthat no servant, no porter has left any letter or note?"The man replied that none had."How very odd!" said she, in a low and disappointed voice, as sheturned away to the window."How odd, indeed!" repeated Elinor within herself, regarding her sisterwith uneasiness.  "If she had not known him to be in town she would nothave written to him, as she did; she would have written to Combe Magna;and if he is in town, how odd that he should neither come nor write!Oh! my dear mother, you must be wrong in permitting an engagementbetween a daughter so young, a man so little known, to be carried on inso doubtful, so mysterious a manner!  I long to inquire; and how willMY interference be borne."She determined, after some consideration, that if appearances continuedmany days longer as unpleasant as they now were, she would represent inthe strongest manner to her mother the necessity of some seriousenquiry into the affair.Mrs. Palmer and two elderly ladies of Mrs. Jennings's intimateacquaintance, whom she had met and invited in the morning, dined withthem.  The former left them soon after tea to fulfill her eveningengagements; and Elinor was obliged to assist in making a whist tablefor the others.  Marianne was of no use on these occasions, as shewould never learn the game; but though her time was therefore at herown disposal, the evening was by no means more productive of pleasureto her than to Elinor, for it was spent in all the anxiety ofexpectation and the pain of disappointment.  She sometimes endeavouredfor a few minutes to read; but the book was soon thrown aside, and shereturned to the more interesting employment of walking backwards andforwards across the room, pausing for a moment whenever she came to thewindow, in hopes of distinguishing the long-expected rap."If this open weather holds much longer," said Mrs. Jennings, when theymet at breakfast the following morning, "Sir John will not like leavingBarton next week; 'tis a sad thing for sportsmen to lose a day'spleasure.  Poor souls!  I always pity them when they do; they seem totake it so much to heart.""That is true," cried Marianne, in a cheerful voice, and walking to thewindow as she spoke, to examine the day.  "I had not thought of that.This weather will keep many sportsmen in the country."It was a lucky recollection, all her good spirits were restored by it."It is charming weather for THEM indeed," she continued, as she satdown to the breakfast table with a happy countenance.  "How much theymust enjoy it! But" (with a little return of anxiety) "it cannot beexpected to last long.  At this time of the year, and after such aseries of rain, we shall certainly have very little more of it.  Frostswill soon set in, and in all probability with severity.  In another dayor two perhaps; this extreme mildness can hardly last longer--nay,perhaps it may freeze tonight!""At any rate," said Elinor, wishing to prevent Mrs. Jennings fromseeing her sister's thoughts as clearly as she did, "I dare say weshall have Sir John and Lady Middleton in town by the end of next week.""Ay, my dear, I'll warrant you we do.  Mary always has her own way.""And now," silently conjectured Elinor, "she will write to Combe bythis day's post."But if she DID, the letter was written and sent away with a privacywhich eluded all her watchfulness to ascertain the fact.  Whatever thetruth of it might be, and far as Elinor was from feeling thoroughcontentment about it, yet while she saw Marianne in spirits, she couldnot be very uncomfortable herself.  And Marianne was in spirits; happyin the mildness of the weather, and still happier in her expectation ofa frost.The morning was chiefly spent in leaving cards at the houses of Mrs.Jennings's acquaintance to inform them of her being in town; andMarianne was all the time busy in observing the direction of the wind,watching the variations of the sky and imagining an alteration in theair."Don't you find it colder than it was in the morning, Elinor? Thereseems to me a very decided difference.  I can hardly keep my hands warmeven in my muff.  It was not so yesterday, I think.  The clouds seemparting too, the sun will be out in a moment, and we shall have a clearafternoon."Elinor was alternately diverted and pained; but Marianne persevered,and saw every night in the brightness of the fire, and every morning inthe appearance of the atmosphere, the certain symptoms of approachingfrost.The Miss Dashwoods had no greater reason to be dissatisfied with Mrs.Jennings's style of living, and set of acquaintance, than with herbehaviour to themselves, which was invariably kind.  Every thing in herhousehold arrangements was conducted on the most liberal plan, andexcepting a few old city friends, whom, to Lady Middleton's regret, shehad never dropped, she visited no one to whom an introduction could atall discompose the feelings of her young companions.  Pleased to findherself more comfortably situated in that particular than she hadexpected, Elinor was very willing to compound for the want of much realenjoyment from any of their evening parties, which, whether at home orabroad, formed only for cards, could have little to amuse her.Colonel Brandon, who had a general invitation to the house, was withthem almost every day; he came to look at Marianne and talk to Elinor,who often derived more satisfaction from conversing with him than fromany other daily occurrence, but who saw at the same time with muchconcern his continued regard for her sister.  She feared it was astrengthening regard.  It grieved her to see the earnestness with whichhe often watched Marianne, and his spirits were certainly worse thanwhen at Barton.About a week after their arrival, it became certain that Willoughby wasalso arrived.  His card was on the table when they came in from themorning's drive."Good God!" cried Marianne, "he has been here while we were out."Elinor, rejoiced to be assured of his being in London, now ventured tosay, "Depend upon it, he will call again tomorrow."  But Marianneseemed hardly to hear her, and on Mrs. Jennings's entrance, escaped withthe precious card.This event, while it raised the spirits of Elinor, restored to those ofher sister all, and more than all, their former agitation.  From thismoment her mind was never quiet; the expectation of seeing him everyhour of the day, made her unfit for any thing.  She insisted on beingleft behind, the next morning, when the others went out.Elinor's thoughts were full of what might be passing in Berkeley Streetduring their absence; but a moment's glance at her sister when theyreturned was enough to inform her, that Willoughby had paid no secondvisit there.  A note was just then brought in, and laid on the table."For me!" cried Marianne, stepping hastily forward."No, ma'am, for my mistress."But Marianne, not convinced, took it instantly up."It is indeed for Mrs. Jennings; how provoking!""You are expecting a letter, then?" said Elinor, unable to be longersilent."Yes, a little--not much."After a short pause.  "You have no confidence in me, Marianne.""Nay, Elinor, this reproach from YOU--you who have confidence in noone!""Me!" returned Elinor in some confusion; "indeed, Marianne, I havenothing to tell.""Nor I," answered Marianne with energy, "our situations then are alike.We have neither of us any thing to tell; you, because you do notcommunicate, and I, because I conceal nothing."Elinor, distressed by this charge of reserve in herself, which she wasnot at liberty to do away, knew not how, under such circumstances, topress for greater openness in Marianne.Mrs. Jennings soon appeared, and the note being given her, she read italoud.  It was from Lady Middleton, announcing their arrival in ConduitStreet the night before, and requesting the company of her mother andcousins the following evening.  Business on Sir John's part, and aviolent cold on her own, prevented their calling in Berkeley Street.The invitation was accepted; but when the hour of appointment drewnear, necessary as it was in common civility to Mrs. Jennings, thatthey should both attend her on such a visit, Elinor had some difficultyin persuading her sister to go, for still she had seen nothing ofWilloughby; and therefore was not more indisposed for amusement abroad,than unwilling to run the risk of his calling again in her absence.Elinor found, when the evening was over, that disposition is notmaterially altered by a change of abode, for although scarcely settledin town, Sir John had contrived to collect around him, nearly twentyyoung people, and to amuse them with a ball.  This was an affair,however, of which Lady Middleton did not approve.  In the country, anunpremeditated dance was very allowable; but in London, where thereputation of elegance was more important and less easily attained, itwas risking too much for the gratification of a few girls, to have itknown that Lady Middleton had given a small dance of eight or ninecouple, with two violins, and a mere side-board collation.Mr. and Mrs. Palmer were of the party; from the former, whom they hadnot seen before since their arrival in town, as he was careful to avoidthe appearance of any attention to his mother-in-law, and thereforenever came near her, they received no mark of recognition on theirentrance.  He looked at them slightly, without seeming to know who theywere, and merely nodded to Mrs. Jennings from the other side of theroom.  Marianne gave one glance round the apartment as she entered: itwas enough--HE was not there--and she sat down, equally ill-disposed toreceive or communicate pleasure.  After they had been assembled aboutan hour, Mr. Palmer sauntered towards the Miss Dashwoods to express hissurprise on seeing them in town, though Colonel Brandon had been firstinformed of their arrival at his house, and he had himself saidsomething very droll on hearing that they were to come."I thought you were both in Devonshire," said he."Did you?" replied Elinor."When do you go back again?""I do not know." And thus ended their discourse.Never had Marianne been so unwilling to dance in her life, as she wasthat evening, and never so much fatigued by the exercise.  Shecomplained of it as they returned to Berkeley Street."Aye, aye," said Mrs. Jennings, "we know the reason of all that verywell; if a certain person who shall be nameless, had been there, youwould not have been a bit tired: and to say the truth it was not verypretty of him not to give you the meeting when he was invited.""Invited!" cried Marianne."So my daughter Middleton told me, for it seems Sir John met himsomewhere in the street this morning." Marianne said no more, butlooked exceedingly hurt.  Impatient in this situation to be doingsomething that might lead to her sister's relief, Elinor resolved towrite the next morning to her mother, and hoped by awakening her fearsfor the health of Marianne, to procure those inquiries which had beenso long delayed; and she was still more eagerly bent on this measure byperceiving after breakfast on the morrow, that Marianne was againwriting to Willoughby, for she could not suppose it to be to any otherperson.About the middle of the day, Mrs. Jennings went out by herself onbusiness, and Elinor began her letter directly, while Marianne, toorestless for employment, too anxious for conversation, walked from onewindow to the other, or sat down by the fire in melancholy meditation.Elinor was very earnest in her application to her mother, relating allthat had passed, her suspicions of Willoughby's inconstancy, urging herby every plea of duty and affection to demand from Marianne an accountof her real situation with respect to him.Her letter was scarcely finished, when a rap foretold a visitor, andColonel Brandon was announced.  Marianne, who had seen him from thewindow, and who hated company of any kind, left the room before heentered it.  He looked more than usually grave, and though expressingsatisfaction at finding Miss Dashwood alone, as if he had somewhat inparticular to tell her, sat for some time without saying a word.Elinor, persuaded that he had some communication to make in which hersister was concerned, impatiently expected its opening.  It was not thefirst time of her feeling the same kind of conviction; for, more thanonce before, beginning with the observation of "your sister looksunwell to-day," or "your sister seems out of spirits," he had appearedon the point, either of disclosing, or of inquiring, somethingparticular about her.  After a pause of several minutes, their silencewas broken, by his asking her in a voice of some agitation, when he wasto congratulate her on the acquisition of a brother?  Elinor was notprepared for such a question, and having no answer ready, was obligedto adopt the simple and common expedient, of asking what he meant?  Hetried to smile as he replied, "your sister's engagement to Mr.Willoughby is very generally known.""It cannot be generally known," returned Elinor, "for her own family donot know it."He looked surprised and said, "I beg your pardon, I am afraid myinquiry has been impertinent; but I had not supposed any secrecyintended, as they openly correspond, and their marriage is universallytalked of.""How can that be? By whom can you have heard it mentioned?""By many--by some of whom you know nothing, by others with whom you aremost intimate, Mrs. Jennings, Mrs. Palmer, and the Middletons.  Butstill I might not have believed it, for where the mind is perhapsrather unwilling to be convinced, it will always find something tosupport its doubts, if I had not, when the servant let me in today,accidentally seen a letter in his hand, directed to Mr. Willoughby inyour sister's writing.  I came to inquire, but I was convinced before Icould ask the question.  Is every thing finally settled?  Is itimpossible to-?  But I have no right, and I could have no chance ofsucceeding.  Excuse me, Miss Dashwood.  I believe I have been wrong insaying so much, but I hardly know what to do, and on your prudence Ihave the strongest dependence.  Tell me that it is all absolutelyresolved on, that any attempt, that in short concealment, ifconcealment be possible, is all that remains."These words, which conveyed to Elinor a direct avowal of his love forher sister, affected her very much.  She was not immediately able tosay anything, and even when her spirits were recovered, she debated fora short time, on the answer it would be most proper to give.  The realstate of things between Willoughby and her sister was so little knownto herself, that in endeavouring to explain it, she might be as liableto say too much as too little.  Yet as she was convinced thatMarianne's affection for Willoughby, could leave no hope of ColonelBrandon's success, whatever the event of that affection might be, andat the same time wished to shield her conduct from censure, she thoughtit most prudent and kind, after some consideration, to say more thanshe really knew or believed.  She acknowledged, therefore, that thoughshe had never been informed by themselves of the terms on which theystood with each other, of their mutual affection she had no doubt, andof their correspondence she was not astonished to hear.He listened to her with silent attention, and on her ceasing to speak,rose directly from his seat, and after saying in a voice of emotion,"to your sister I wish all imaginable happiness; to Willoughby that hemay endeavour to deserve her,"--took leave, and went away.Elinor derived no comfortable feelings from this conversation, tolessen the uneasiness of her mind on other points; she was left, on thecontrary, with a melancholy impression of Colonel Brandon'sunhappiness, and was prevented even from wishing it removed, by heranxiety for the very event that must confirm it.Nothing occurred during the next three or four days, to make Elinorregret what she had done, in applying to her mother; for Willoughbyneither came nor wrote.  They were engaged about the end of that timeto attend Lady Middleton to a party, from which Mrs. Jennings was keptaway by the indisposition of her youngest daughter; and for this party,Marianne, wholly dispirited, careless of her appearance, and seemingequally indifferent whether she went or staid, prepared, without onelook of hope or one expression of pleasure.  She sat by thedrawing-room fire after tea, till the moment of Lady Middleton'sarrival, without once stirring from her seat, or altering her attitude,lost in her own thoughts, and insensible of her sister's presence; andwhen at last they were told that Lady Middleton waited for them at thedoor, she started as if she had forgotten that any one was expected.They arrived in due time at the place of destination, and as soon asthe string of carriages before them would allow, alighted, ascended thestairs, heard their names announced from one landing-place to anotherin an audible voice, and entered a room splendidly lit up, quite fullof company, and insufferably hot.  When they had paid their tribute ofpoliteness by curtsying to the lady of the house, they were permittedto mingle in the crowd, and take their share of the heat andinconvenience, to which their arrival must necessarily add.  After sometime spent in saying little or doing less, Lady Middleton sat down toCassino, and as Marianne was not in spirits for moving about, she andElinor luckily succeeding to chairs, placed themselves at no greatdistance from the table.They had not remained in this manner long, before Elinor perceivedWilloughby, standing within a few yards of them, in earnestconversation with a very fashionable looking young woman.  She sooncaught his eye, and he immediately bowed, but without attempting tospeak to her, or to approach Marianne, though he could not but see her;and then continued his discourse with the same lady.  Elinor turnedinvoluntarily to Marianne, to see whether it could be unobserved byher.  At that moment she first perceived him, and her whole countenanceglowing with sudden delight, she would have moved towards himinstantly, had not her sister caught hold of her."Good heavens!" she exclaimed, "he is there--he is there--Oh! why doeshe not look at me? why cannot I speak to him?""Pray, pray be composed," cried Elinor, "and do not betray what youfeel to every body present.  Perhaps he has not observed you yet."This however was more than she could believe herself; and to becomposed at such a moment was not only beyond the reach of Marianne, itwas beyond her wish.  She sat in an agony of impatience which affectedevery feature.At last he turned round again, and regarded them both; she started up,and pronouncing his name in a tone of affection, held out her hand tohim.  He approached, and addressing himself rather to Elinor thanMarianne, as if wishing to avoid her eye, and determined not to observeher attitude, inquired in a hurried manner after Mrs. Dashwood, andasked how long they had been in town.  Elinor was robbed of allpresence of mind by such an address, and was unable to say a word.  Butthe feelings of her sister were instantly expressed.  Her face wascrimsoned over, and she exclaimed, in a voice of the greatest emotion,"Good God! Willoughby, what is the meaning of this?  Have you notreceived my letters?  Will you not shake hands with me?"He could not then avoid it, but her touch seemed painful to him, and heheld her hand only for a moment.  During all this time he was evidentlystruggling for composure.  Elinor watched his countenance and saw itsexpression becoming more tranquil.  After a moment's pause, he spokewith calmness."I did myself the honour of calling in Berkeley Street last Tuesday,and very much regretted that I was not fortunate enough to findyourselves and Mrs. Jennings at home.  My card was not lost, I hope.""But have you not received my notes?" cried Marianne in the wildestanxiety.  "Here is some mistake I am sure--some dreadful mistake.  Whatcan be the meaning of it?  Tell me, Willoughby; for heaven's sake tellme, what is the matter?"He made no reply; his complexion changed and all his embarrassmentreturned; but as if, on catching the eye of the young lady with whom hehad been previously talking, he felt the necessity of instant exertion,he recovered himself again, and after saying, "Yes, I had the pleasureof receiving the information of your arrival in town, which you were sogood as to send me," turned hastily away with a slight bow and joinedhis friend.Marianne, now looking dreadfully white, and unable to stand, sunk intoher chair, and Elinor, expecting every moment to see her faint, triedto screen her from the observation of others, while reviving her withlavender water."Go to him, Elinor," she cried, as soon as she could speak, "and forcehim to come to me.  Tell him I must see him again--must speak to himinstantly.-- I cannot rest--I shall not have a moment's peace till thisis explained--some dreadful misapprehension or other.-- Oh go to himthis moment.""How can that be done? No, my dearest Marianne, you must wait.  This isnot the place for explanations.  Wait only till tomorrow."With difficulty however could she prevent her from following himherself; and to persuade her to check her agitation, to wait, at least,with the appearance of composure, till she might speak to him with moreprivacy and more effect, was impossible; for Marianne continuedincessantly to give way in a low voice to the misery of her feelings,by exclamations of wretchedness.  In a short time Elinor saw Willoughbyquit the room by the door towards the staircase, and telling Mariannethat he was gone, urged the impossibility of speaking to him again thatevening, as a fresh argument for her to be calm.  She instantly beggedher sister would entreat Lady Middleton to take them home, as she wastoo miserable to stay a minute longer.Lady Middleton, though in the middle of a rubber, on being informedthat Marianne was unwell, was too polite to object for a moment to herwish of going away, and making over her cards to a friend, theydeparted as soon the carriage could be found.  Scarcely a word wasspoken during their return to Berkeley Street.  Marianne was in asilent agony, too much oppressed even for tears; but as Mrs. Jenningswas luckily not come home, they could go directly to their own room,where hartshorn restored her a little to herself.  She was soonundressed and in bed, and as she seemed desirous of being alone, hersister then left her, and while she waited the return of Mrs. Jennings,had leisure enough for thinking over the past.That some kind of engagement had subsisted between Willoughby andMarianne she could not doubt, and that Willoughby was weary of it,seemed equally clear; for however Marianne might still feed her ownwishes, SHE could not attribute such behaviour to mistake ormisapprehension of any kind.  Nothing but a thorough change ofsentiment could account for it.  Her indignation would have been stillstronger than it was, had she not witnessed that embarrassment whichseemed to speak a consciousness of his own misconduct, and preventedher from believing him so unprincipled as to have been sporting withthe affections of her sister from the first, without any design thatwould bear investigation.  Absence might have weakened his regard, andconvenience might have determined him to overcome it, but that such aregard had formerly existed she could not bring herself to doubt.As for Marianne, on the pangs which so unhappy a meeting must alreadyhave given her, and on those still more severe which might await her inits probable consequence, she could not reflect without the deepestconcern.  Her own situation gained in the comparison; for while shecould ESTEEM Edward as much as ever, however they might be divided infuture, her mind might be always supported.  But every circumstancethat could embitter such an evil seemed uniting to heighten the miseryof Marianne in a final separation from Willoughby--in an immediate andirreconcilable rupture with him.Before the house-maid had lit their fire the next day, or the sungained any power over a cold, gloomy morning in January, Marianne, onlyhalf dressed, was kneeling against one of the window-seats for the sakeof all the little light she could command from it, and writing as fastas a continual flow of tears would permit her.  In this situation,Elinor, roused from sleep by her agitation and sobs, first perceivedher; and after observing her for a few moments with silent anxiety,said, in a tone of the most considerate gentleness,"Marianne, may I ask-?""No, Elinor," she replied, "ask nothing; you will soon know all."The sort of desperate calmness with which this was said, lasted nolonger than while she spoke, and was immediately followed by a returnof the same excessive affliction.  It was some minutes before she couldgo on with her letter, and the frequent bursts of grief which stillobliged her, at intervals, to withhold her pen, were proofs enough ofher feeling how more than probable it was that she was writing for thelast time to Willoughby.Elinor paid her every quiet and unobtrusive attention in her power; andshe would have tried to sooth and tranquilize her still more, had notMarianne entreated her, with all the eagerness of the most nervousirritability, not to speak to her for the world.  In suchcircumstances, it was better for both that they should not be longtogether; and the restless state of Marianne's mind not only preventedher from remaining in the room a moment after she was dressed, butrequiring at once solitude and continual change of place, made herwander about the house till breakfast time, avoiding the sight of everybody.At breakfast she neither ate, nor attempted to eat any thing; andElinor's attention was then all employed, not in urging her, not inpitying her, nor in appearing to regard her, but in endeavouring toengage Mrs. Jennings's notice entirely to herself.As this was a favourite meal with Mrs. Jennings, it lasted aconsiderable time, and they were just setting themselves, after it,round the common working table, when a letter was delivered toMarianne, which she eagerly caught from the servant, and, turning of adeath-like paleness, instantly ran out of the room.  Elinor, who saw asplainly by this, as if she had seen the direction, that it must comefrom Willoughby, felt immediately such a sickness at heart as made herhardly able to hold up her head, and sat in such a general tremour asmade her fear it impossible to escape Mrs. Jennings's notice.  That goodlady, however, saw only that Marianne had received a letter fromWilloughby, which appeared to her a very good joke, and which shetreated accordingly, by hoping, with a laugh, that she would find it toher liking.  Of Elinor's distress, she was too busily employed inmeasuring lengths of worsted for her rug, to see any thing at all; andcalmly continuing her talk, as soon as Marianne disappeared, she said,"Upon my word, I never saw a young woman so desperately in love in mylife!  MY girls were nothing to her, and yet they used to be foolishenough; but as for Miss Marianne, she is quite an altered creature.  Ihope, from the bottom of my heart, he won't keep her waiting muchlonger, for it is quite grievous to see her look so ill and forlorn.Pray, when are they to be married?"Elinor, though never less disposed to speak than at that moment,obliged herself to answer such an attack as this, and, therefore,trying to smile, replied, "And have you really, Ma'am, talked yourselfinto a persuasion of my sister's being engaged to Mr. Willoughby?  Ithought it had been only a joke, but so serious a question seems toimply more; and I must beg, therefore, that you will not deceiveyourself any longer.  I do assure you that nothing would surprise memore than to hear of their being going to be married.""For shame, for shame, Miss Dashwood! how can you talk so?  Don't weall know that it must be a match, that they were over head and ears inlove with each other from the first moment they met?  Did not I seethem together in Devonshire every day, and all day long; and did not Iknow that your sister came to town with me on purpose to buy weddingclothes?  Come, come, this won't do.  Because you are so sly about ityourself, you think nobody else has any senses; but it is no suchthing, I can tell you, for it has been known all over town this ever solong.  I tell every body of it and so does Charlotte.""Indeed, Ma'am," said Elinor, very seriously, "you are mistaken.Indeed, you are doing a very unkind thing in spreading the report, andyou will find that you have though you will not believe me now."Mrs. Jennings laughed again, but Elinor had not spirits to say more,and eager at all events to know what Willoughby had written, hurriedaway to their room, where, on opening the door, she saw Mariannestretched on the bed, almost choked by grief, one letter in her hand,and two or three others laying by her.  Elinor drew near, but withoutsaying a word; and seating herself on the bed, took her hand, kissedher affectionately several times, and then gave way to a burst oftears, which at first was scarcely less violent than Marianne's. Thelatter, though unable to speak, seemed to feel all the tenderness ofthis behaviour, and after some time thus spent in joint affliction, sheput all the letters into Elinor's hands; and then covering her facewith her handkerchief, almost screamed with agony.  Elinor, who knewthat such grief, shocking as it was to witness it, must have itscourse, watched by her till this excess of suffering had somewhat spentitself, and then turning eagerly to Willoughby's letter, read asfollows:                              "Bond Street, January.     "MY DEAR MADAM,     "I have just had the honour of receiving your     letter, for which I beg to return my sincere     acknowledgments.  I am much concerned to find there     was anything in my behaviour last night that did     not meet your approbation; and though I am quite at     a loss to discover in what point I could be so     unfortunate as to offend you, I entreat your     forgiveness of what I can assure you to have been     perfectly unintentional.  I shall never reflect on     my former acquaintance with your family in Devonshire     without the most grateful pleasure, and flatter     myself it will not be broken by any mistake or     misapprehension of my actions.  My esteem for your     whole family is very sincere; but if I have been so     unfortunate as to give rise to a belief of more than     I felt, or meant to express, I shall reproach myself     for not having been more guarded in my professions     of that esteem.  That I should ever have meant more     you will allow to be impossible, when you understand     that my affections have been long engaged elsewhere,     and it will not be many weeks, I believe, before     this engagement is fulfilled.  It is with great     regret that I obey your commands in returning the     letters with which I have been honoured from you,     and the lock of hair, which you so obligingly bestowed     on me.     "I am, dear Madam,               "Your most obedient                    "humble servant,                                        "JOHN WILLOUGHBY."With what indignation such a letter as this must be read by MissDashwood, may be imagined.  Though aware, before she began it, that itmust bring a confession of his inconstancy, and confirm theirseparation for ever, she was not aware that such language could besuffered to announce it; nor could she have supposed Willoughby capableof departing so far from the appearance of every honourable anddelicate feeling--so far from the common decorum of a gentleman, as tosend a letter so impudently cruel: a letter which, instead of bringingwith his desire of a release any professions of regret, acknowledged nobreach of faith, denied all peculiar affection whatever--a letter ofwhich every line was an insult, and which proclaimed its writer to bedeep in hardened villainy.She paused over it for some time with indignant astonishment; then readit again and again; but every perusal only served to increase herabhorrence of the man, and so bitter were her feelings against him,that she dared not trust herself to speak, lest she might woundMarianne still deeper by treating their disengagement, not as a loss toher of any possible good but as an escape from the worst and mostirremediable of all evils, a connection, for life, with an unprincipledman, as a deliverance the most real, a blessing the most important.In her earnest meditations on the contents of the letter, on thedepravity of that mind which could dictate it, and probably, on thevery different mind of a very different person, who had no otherconnection whatever with the affair than what her heart gave him withevery thing that passed, Elinor forgot the immediate distress of hersister, forgot that she had three letters on her lap yet unread, and soentirely forgot how long she had been in the room, that when on hearinga carriage drive up to the door, she went to the window to see whocould be coming so unreasonably early, she was all astonishment toperceive Mrs. Jennings's chariot, which she knew had not been orderedtill one.  Determined not to quit Marianne, though hopeless ofcontributing, at present, to her ease, she hurried away to excuseherself from attending Mrs. Jennings, on account of her sister beingindisposed.  Mrs. Jennings, with a thoroughly good-humoured concern forits cause, admitted the excuse most readily, and Elinor, after seeingher safe off, returned to Marianne, whom she found attempting to risefrom the bed, and whom she reached just in time to prevent her fromfalling on the floor, faint and giddy from a long want of proper restand food; for it was many days since she had any appetite, and manynights since she had really slept; and now, when her mind was no longersupported by the fever of suspense, the consequence of all this wasfelt in an aching head, a weakened stomach, and a general nervousfaintness.  A glass of wine, which Elinor procured for her directly,made her more comfortable, and she was at last able to express somesense of her kindness, by saying,"Poor Elinor! how unhappy I make you!""I only wish," replied her sister, "there were any thing I COULD do,which might be of comfort to you."This, as every thing else would have been, was too much for Marianne,who could only exclaim, in the anguish of her heart, "Oh! Elinor, I ammiserable, indeed," before her voice was entirely lost in sobs.Elinor could no longer witness this torrent of unresisted grief insilence."Exert yourself, dear Marianne," she cried, "if you would not killyourself and all who love you.  Think of your mother; think of hermisery while YOU suffer: for her sake you must exert yourself.""I cannot, I cannot," cried Marianne; "leave me, leave me, if Idistress you; leave me, hate me, forget me!  but do not torture me so.Oh! how easy for those, who have no sorrow of their own to talk ofexertion!  Happy, happy Elinor, YOU cannot have an idea of what Isuffer.""Do you call ME happy, Marianne?  Ah! if you knew!--And can you believeme to be so, while I see you so wretched!""Forgive me, forgive me," throwing her arms round her sister's neck; "Iknow you feel for me; I know what a heart you have; but yet youare--you must be happy; Edward loves you--what, oh what, can do awaysuch happiness as that?""Many, many circumstances," said Elinor, solemnly."No, no, no," cried Marianne wildly, "he loves you, and only you.  YouCAN have no grief.""I can have no pleasure while I see you in this state.""And you will never see me otherwise.  Mine is a misery which nothingcan do away.""You must not talk so, Marianne.  Have you no comforts? no friends?  Isyour loss such as leaves no opening for consolation?  Much as yousuffer now, think of what you would have suffered if the discovery ofhis character had been delayed to a later period--if your engagementhad been carried on for months and months, as it might have been,before he chose to put an end to it.  Every additional day of unhappyconfidence, on your side, would have made the blow more dreadful.""Engagement!" cried Marianne, "there has been no engagement.""No engagement!""No, he is not so unworthy as you believe him.  He has broken no faithwith me.""But he told you that he loved you.""Yes--no--never absolutely.  It was every day implied, but neverprofessedly declared.  Sometimes I thought it had been--but it neverwas.""Yet you wrote to him?"--"Yes--could that be wrong after all that had passed?-- But I cannottalk."Elinor said no more, and turning again to the three letters which nowraised a much stronger curiosity than before, directly ran over thecontents of all.  The first, which was what her sister had sent him ontheir arrival in town, was to this effect.                         Berkeley Street, January.     "How surprised you will be, Willoughby, on     receiving this; and I think you will feel something     more than surprise, when you know that I am in town.     An opportunity of coming hither, though with Mrs.     Jennings, was a temptation we could not resist.     I wish you may receive this in time to come here     to-night, but I will not depend on it.  At any rate     I shall expect you to-morrow. For the present, adieu.                                             "M.D."Her second note, which had been written on the morning after the danceat the Middletons', was in these words:--     "I cannot express my disappointment in having     missed you the day before yesterday, nor my astonishment     at not having received any answer to a note which     I sent you above a week ago.  I have been expecting     to hear from you, and still more to see you, every     hour of the day.  Pray call again as soon as possible,     and explain the reason of my having expected this     in vain.  You had better come earlier another time,     because we are generally out by one.  We were last     night at Lady Middleton's, where there was a dance.     I have been told that you were asked to be of the     party.  But could it be so?  You must be very much     altered indeed since we parted, if that could be     the case, and you not there.  But I will not suppose     this possible, and I hope very soon to receive your     personal assurance of its being otherwise.                                            "M.D."The contents of her last note to him were these:--     "What am I to imagine, Willoughby, by your     behaviour last night?  Again I demand an explanation     of it.  I was prepared to meet you with the pleasure     which our separation naturally produced, with the     familiarity which our intimacy at Barton appeared     to me to justify.  I was repulsed indeed! I have     passed a wretched night in endeavouring to excuse     a conduct which can scarcely be called less than     insulting; but though I have not yet been able to     form any reasonable apology for your behaviour,     I am perfectly ready to hear your justification of     it.  You have perhaps been misinformed, or purposely     deceived, in something concerning me, which may have     lowered me in your opinion.  Tell me what it is,     explain the grounds on which you acted, and I shall     be satisfied, in being able to satisfy you.  It     would grieve me indeed to be obliged to think ill     of you; but if I am to do it, if I am to learn that     you are not what we have hitherto believed you, that     your regard for us all was insincere, that your     behaviour to me was intended only to deceive, let     it be told as soon as possible.  My feelings are at     present in a state of dreadful indecision; I wish     to acquit you, but certainty on either side will be     ease to what I now suffer.  If your sentiments are     no longer what they were, you will return my notes,     and the lock of my hair which is in your possession.                                             "M.D."That such letters, so full of affection and confidence, could have beenso answered, Elinor, for Willoughby's sake, would have been unwillingto believe.  But her condemnation of him did not blind her to theimpropriety of their having been written at all; and she was silentlygrieving over the imprudence which had hazarded such unsolicited proofsof tenderness, not warranted by anything preceding, and most severelycondemned by the event, when Marianne, perceiving that she had finishedthe letters, observed to her that they contained nothing but what anyone would have written in the same situation."I felt myself," she added, "to be as solemnly engaged to him, as ifthe strictest legal covenant had bound us to each other.""I can believe it," said Elinor; "but unfortunately he did not feel thesame.""He DID feel the same, Elinor--for weeks and weeks he felt it.  I knowhe did.  Whatever may have changed him now, (and nothing but theblackest art employed against me can have done it), I was once as dearto him as my own soul could wish.  This lock of hair, which now he canso readily give up, was begged of me with the most earnestsupplication.  Had you seen his look, his manner, had you heard hisvoice at that moment!  Have you forgot the last evening of our beingtogether at Barton?  The morning that we parted too!  When he told methat it might be many weeks before we met again--his distress--can Iever forget his distress?"For a moment or two she could say no more; but when this emotion hadpassed away, she added, in a firmer tone,"Elinor, I have been cruelly used; but not by Willoughby.""Dearest Marianne, who but himself?  By whom can he have beeninstigated?""By all the world, rather than by his own heart.  I could ratherbelieve every creature of my acquaintance leagued together to ruin mein his opinion, than believe his nature capable of such cruelty.  Thiswoman of whom he writes--whoever she be--or any one, in short, but yourown dear self, mama, and Edward, may have been so barbarous to bely me.Beyond you three, is there a creature in the world whom I would notrather suspect of evil than Willoughby, whose heart I know so well?"Elinor would not contend, and only replied, "Whoever may have been sodetestably your enemy, let them be cheated of their malignant triumph,my dear sister, by seeing how nobly the consciousness of your owninnocence and good intentions supports your spirits.  It is areasonable and laudable pride which resists such malevolence.""No, no," cried Marianne, "misery such as mine has no pride.  I carenot who knows that I am wretched.  The triumph of seeing me so may beopen to all the world.  Elinor, Elinor, they who suffer little may beproud and independent as they like--may resist insult, or returnmortification--but I cannot.  I must feel--I must be wretched--and theyare welcome to enjoy the consciousness of it that can.""But for my mother's sake and mine--""I would do more than for my own.  But to appear happy when I am somiserable--Oh! who can require it?"Again they were both silent.  Elinor was employed in walkingthoughtfully from the fire to the window, from the window to the fire,without knowing that she received warmth from one, or discerningobjects through the other; and Marianne, seated at the foot of the bed,with her head leaning against one of its posts, again took upWilloughby's letter, and, after shuddering over every sentence,exclaimed--"It is too much! Oh, Willoughby, Willoughby, could this be yours!Cruel, cruel--nothing can acquit you.  Elinor, nothing can.  Whateverhe might have heard against me--ought he not to have suspended hisbelief? ought he not to have told me of it, to have given me the powerof clearing myself? 'The lock of hair, (repeating it from the letter,)which you so obligingly bestowed on me'--That is unpardonable.Willoughby, where was your heart when you wrote those words?  Oh,barbarously insolent!--Elinor, can he be justified?""No, Marianne, in no possible way.""And yet this woman--who knows what her art may have been?--how long itmay have been premeditated, and how deeply contrived by her!--Who isshe?--Who can she be?--Whom did I ever hear him talk of as young andattractive among his female acquaintance?--Oh! no one, no one--hetalked to me only of myself."Another pause ensued; Marianne was greatly agitated, and it ended thus."Elinor, I must go home.  I must go and comfort mama.  Can not we begone to-morrow?""To-morrow, Marianne!""Yes, why should I stay here? I came only for Willoughby's sake--andnow who cares for me? Who regards me?""It would be impossible to go to-morrow. We owe Mrs. Jennings much morethan civility; and civility of the commonest kind must prevent such ahasty removal as that.""Well then, another day or two, perhaps; but I cannot stay here long, Icannot stay to endure the questions and remarks of all these people.The Middletons and Palmers--how am I to bear their pity?  The pity ofsuch a woman as Lady Middleton!  Oh, what would HE say to that!"Elinor advised her to lie down again, and for a moment she did so; butno attitude could give her ease; and in restless pain of mind and bodyshe moved from one posture to another, till growing more and morehysterical, her sister could with difficulty keep her on the bed atall, and for some time was fearful of being constrained to call forassistance.  Some lavender drops, however, which she was at lengthpersuaded to take, were of use; and from that time till Mrs. Jenningsreturned, she continued on the bed quiet and motionless.Mrs. Jennings came immediately to their room on her return, and withoutwaiting to have her request of admittance answered, opened the door andwalked in with a look of real concern."How do you do my dear?"--said she in a voice of great compassion toMarianne, who turned away her face without attempting to answer."How is she, Miss Dashwood?--Poor thing! she looks very bad.-- Nowonder.  Ay, it is but too true.  He is to be married very soon--agood-for-nothing fellow!  I have no patience with him.  Mrs. Taylortold me of it half an hour ago, and she was told it by a particularfriend of Miss Grey herself, else I am sure I should not have believedit; and I was almost ready to sink as it was.  Well, said I, all I cansay is, that if this be true, he has used a young lady of myacquaintance abominably ill, and I wish with all my soul his wife mayplague his heart out.  And so I shall always say, my dear, you maydepend on it.  I have no notion of men's going on in this way; and ifever I meet him again, I will give him such a dressing as he has nothad this many a day.  But there is one comfort, my dear Miss Marianne;he is not the only young man in the world worth having; and with yourpretty face you will never want admirers.  Well, poor thing!  I won'tdisturb her any longer, for she had better have her cry out at once andhave done with.  The Parrys and Sandersons luckily are coming tonightyou know, and that will amuse her."She then went away, walking on tiptoe out of the room, as if shesupposed her young friend's affliction could be increased by noise.Marianne, to the surprise of her sister, determined on dining withthem.  Elinor even advised her against it.  But "no, she would go down;she could bear it very well, and the bustle about her would be less."Elinor, pleased to have her governed for a moment by such a motive,though believing it hardly possible that she could sit out the dinner,said no more; and adjusting her dress for her as well as she could,while Marianne still remained on the bed, was ready to assist her intothe dining room as soon as they were summoned to it.When there, though looking most wretchedly, she ate more and was calmerthan her sister had expected.  Had she tried to speak, or had she beenconscious of half Mrs. Jennings's well-meant but ill-judged attentionsto her, this calmness could not have been maintained; but not asyllable escaped her lips; and the abstraction of her thoughtspreserved her in ignorance of every thing that was passing before her.Elinor, who did justice to Mrs. Jennings's kindness, though itseffusions were often distressing, and sometimes almost ridiculous, madeher those acknowledgments, and returned her those civilities, which hersister could not make or return for herself.  Their good friend sawthat Marianne was unhappy, and felt that every thing was due to herwhich might make her at all less so.  She treated her therefore, withall the indulgent fondness of a parent towards a favourite child on thelast day of its holidays.  Marianne was to have the best place by thefire, was to be tempted to eat by every delicacy in the house, and tobe amused by the relation of all the news of the day.  Had not Elinor,in the sad countenance of her sister, seen a check to all mirth, shecould have been entertained by Mrs. Jennings's endeavours to cure adisappointment in love, by a variety of sweetmeats and olives, and agood fire.  As soon, however, as the consciousness of all this wasforced by continual repetition on Marianne, she could stay no longer.With a hasty exclamation of Misery, and a sign to her sister not tofollow her, she directly got up and hurried out of the room."Poor soul!" cried Mrs. Jennings, as soon as she was gone, "how itgrieves me to see her!  And I declare if she is not gone away withoutfinishing her wine!  And the dried cherries too!  Lord! nothing seemsto do her any good.  I am sure if I knew of any thing she would like, Iwould send all over the town for it.  Well, it is the oddest thing tome, that a man should use such a pretty girl so ill!  But when there isplenty of money on one side, and next to none on the other, Lord blessyou! they care no more about such things!--""The lady then--Miss Grey I think you called her--is very rich?""Fifty thousand pounds, my dear.  Did you ever see her? a smart,stylish girl they say, but not handsome.  I remember her aunt verywell, Biddy Henshawe; she married a very wealthy man.  But the familyare all rich together.  Fifty thousand pounds! and by all accounts, itwon't come before it's wanted; for they say he is all to pieces.  Nowonder! dashing about with his curricle and hunters!  Well, it don'tsignify talking; but when a young man, be who he will, comes and makeslove to a pretty girl, and promises marriage, he has no business to flyoff from his word only because he grows poor, and a richer girl isready to have him.  Why don't he, in such a case, sell his horses, lethis house, turn off his servants, and make a thorough reform at once? Iwarrant you, Miss Marianne would have been ready to wait till matterscame round.  But that won't do now-a-days; nothing in the way ofpleasure can ever be given up by the young men of this age.""Do you know what kind of a girl Miss Grey is?  Is she said to beamiable?""I never heard any harm of her; indeed I hardly ever heard hermentioned; except that Mrs. Taylor did say this morning, that one dayMiss Walker hinted to her, that she believed Mr. and Mrs. Ellison wouldnot be sorry to have Miss Grey married, for she and Mrs. Ellison couldnever agree."--"And who are the Ellisons?""Her guardians, my dear.  But now she is of age and may choose forherself; and a pretty choice she has made!--What now," after pausing amoment--"your poor sister is gone to her own room, I suppose, to moanby herself.  Is there nothing one can get to comfort her?  Poor dear,it seems quite cruel to let her be alone.  Well, by-and-by we shallhave a few friends, and that will amuse her a little.  What shall weplay at?  She hates whist I know; but is there no round game she caresfor?""Dear ma'am, this kindness is quite unnecessary.  Marianne, I dare say,will not leave her room again this evening.  I shall persuade her if Ican to go early to bed, for I am sure she wants rest.""Aye, I believe that will be best for her.  Let her name her ownsupper, and go to bed.  Lord! no wonder she has been looking so bad andso cast down this last week or two, for this matter I suppose has beenhanging over her head as long as that.  And so the letter that cametoday finished it!  Poor soul!  I am sure if I had had a notion of it,I would not have joked her about it for all my money.  But then youknow, how should I guess such a thing?  I made sure of its beingnothing but a common love letter, and you know young people like to belaughed at about them.  Lord!  how concerned Sir John and my daughterswill be when they hear it!  If I had my senses about me I might havecalled in Conduit Street in my way home, and told them of it.  But Ishall see them tomorrow.""It would be unnecessary I am sure, for you to caution Mrs. Palmer andSir John against ever naming Mr. Willoughby, or making the slightestallusion to what has passed, before my sister.  Their own good-naturemust point out to them the real cruelty of appearing to know any thingabout it when she is present; and the less that may ever be said tomyself on the subject, the more my feelings will be spared, as you mydear madam will easily believe.""Oh! Lord! yes, that I do indeed.  It must be terrible for you to hearit talked of; and as for your sister, I am sure I would not mention aword about it to her for the world.  You saw I did not all dinner time.No more would Sir John, nor my daughters, for they are all verythoughtful and considerate; especially if I give them a hint, as Icertainly will.  For my part, I think the less that is said about suchthings, the better, the sooner 'tis blown over and forgot.  And whatdoes talking ever do you know?""In this affair it can only do harm; more so perhaps than in many casesof a similar kind, for it has been attended by circumstances which, forthe sake of every one concerned in it, make it unfit to become thepublic conversation.  I must do THIS justice to Mr. Willoughby--he hasbroken no positive engagement with my sister.""Law, my dear!  Don't pretend to defend him.  No positive engagementindeed! after taking her all over Allenham House, and fixing on thevery rooms they were to live in hereafter!"Elinor, for her sister's sake, could not press the subject farther, andshe hoped it was not required of her for Willoughby's; since, thoughMarianne might lose much, he could gain very little by the enforcementof the real truth.  After a short silence on both sides, Mrs. Jennings,with all her natural hilarity, burst forth again."Well, my dear, 'tis a true saying about an ill-wind, for it will beall the better for Colonel Brandon.  He will have her at last; aye,that he will.  Mind me, now, if they an't married by Mid-summer.  Lord!how he'll chuckle over this news!  I hope he will come tonight.  Itwill be all to one a better match for your sister.  Two thousand a yearwithout debt or drawback--except the little love-child, indeed; aye, Ihad forgot her; but she may be 'prenticed out at a small cost, and thenwhat does it signify?  Delaford is a nice place, I can tell you;exactly what I call a nice old fashioned place, full of comforts andconveniences; quite shut in with great garden walls that are coveredwith the best fruit-trees in the country; and such a mulberry tree inone corner!  Lord! how Charlotte and I did stuff the only time we werethere!  Then, there is a dove-cote, some delightful stew-ponds, and avery pretty canal; and every thing, in short, that one could wish for;and, moreover, it is close to the church, and only a quarter of a milefrom the turnpike-road, so 'tis never dull, for if you only go and situp in an old yew arbour behind the house, you may see all the carriagesthat pass along.  Oh! 'tis a nice place!  A butcher hard by in thevillage, and the parsonage-house within a stone's throw.  To my fancy,a thousand times prettier than Barton Park, where they are forced tosend three miles for their meat, and have not a neighbour nearer thanyour mother.  Well, I shall spirit up the Colonel as soon as I can.One shoulder of mutton, you know, drives another down.  If we CAN butput Willoughby out of her head!""Ay, if we can do THAT, Ma'am," said Elinor, "we shall do very wellwith or without Colonel Brandon." And then rising, she went away tojoin Marianne, whom she found, as she expected, in her own room,leaning, in silent misery, over the small remains of a fire, which,till Elinor's entrance, had been her only light."You had better leave me," was all the notice that her sister receivedfrom her."I will leave you," said Elinor, "if you will go to bed." But this,from the momentary perverseness of impatient suffering, she at firstrefused to do.  Her sister's earnest, though gentle persuasion,however, soon softened her to compliance, and Elinor saw her lay heraching head on the pillow, and as she hoped, in a way to get some quietrest before she left her.In the drawing-room, whither she then repaired, she was soon joined byMrs. Jennings, with a wine-glass, full of something, in her hand."My dear," said she, entering, "I have just recollected that I havesome of the finest old Constantia wine in the house that ever wastasted, so I have brought a glass of it for your sister.  My poorhusband! how fond he was of it!  Whenever he had a touch of his oldcolicky gout, he said it did him more good than any thing else in theworld.  Do take it to your sister.""Dear Ma'am," replied Elinor, smiling at the difference of thecomplaints for which it was recommended, "how good you are!  But I havejust left Marianne in bed, and, I hope, almost asleep; and as I thinknothing will be of so much service to her as rest, if you will give meleave, I will drink the wine myself."Mrs. Jennings, though regretting that she had not been five minutesearlier, was satisfied with the compromise; and Elinor, as sheswallowed the chief of it, reflected, that though its effects on acolicky gout were, at present, of little importance to her, its healingpowers, on a disappointed heart might be as reasonably tried on herselfas on her sister.Colonel Brandon came in while the party were at tea, and by his mannerof looking round the room for Marianne, Elinor immediately fancied thathe neither expected nor wished to see her there, and, in short, that hewas already aware of what occasioned her absence.  Mrs. Jennings wasnot struck by the same thought; for soon after his entrance, she walkedacross the room to the tea-table where Elinor presided, and whispered--"The Colonel looks as grave as ever you see.  He knows nothing of it;do tell him, my dear."He shortly afterwards drew a chair close to hers, and, with a lookwhich perfectly assured her of his good information, inquired after hersister."Marianne is not well," said she.  "She has been indisposed all day,and we have persuaded her to go to bed.""Perhaps, then," he hesitatingly replied, "what I heard this morningmay be--there may be more truth in it than I could believe possible atfirst.""What did you hear?""That a gentleman, whom I had reason to think--in short, that a man,whom I KNEW to be engaged--but how shall I tell you?  If you know italready, as surely you must, I may be spared.""You mean," answered Elinor, with forced calmness, "Mr. Willoughby'smarriage with Miss Grey.  Yes, we DO know it all.  This seems to havebeen a day of general elucidation, for this very morning first unfoldedit to us.  Mr. Willoughby is unfathomable!  Where did you hear it?""In a stationer's shop in Pall Mall, where I had business.  Two ladieswere waiting for their carriage, and one of them was giving the otheran account of the intended match, in a voice so little attemptingconcealment, that it was impossible for me not to hear all.  The nameof Willoughby, John Willoughby, frequently repeated, first caught myattention; and what followed was a positive assertion that every thingwas now finally settled respecting his marriage with Miss Grey--it wasno longer to be a secret--it would take place even within a few weeks,with many particulars of preparations and other matters.  One thing,especially, I remember, because it served to identify the man stillmore:--as soon as the ceremony was over, they were to go to CombeMagna, his seat in Somersetshire.  My astonishment!--but it would beimpossible to describe what I felt.  The communicative lady I learnt,on inquiry, for I stayed in the shop till they were gone, was a Mrs.Ellison, and that, as I have been since informed, is the name of MissGrey's guardian.""It is.  But have you likewise heard that Miss Grey has fifty thousandpounds?  In that, if in any thing, we may find an explanation.""It may be so; but Willoughby is capable--at least I think"--he stoppeda moment; then added in a voice which seemed to distrust itself, "Andyour sister--how did she--""Her sufferings have been very severe.  I have only to hope that theymay be proportionately short.  It has been, it is a most cruelaffliction.  Till yesterday, I believe, she never doubted his regard;and even now, perhaps--but I am almost convinced that he never wasreally attached to her.  He has been very deceitful! and, in somepoints, there seems a hardness of heart about him.""Ah!" said Colonel Brandon, "there is, indeed!  But your sister doesnot--I think you said so--she does not consider quite as you do?""You know her disposition, and may believe how eagerly she would stilljustify him if she could."He made no answer; and soon afterwards, by the removal of thetea-things, and the arrangement of the card parties, the subject wasnecessarily dropped.  Mrs. Jennings, who had watched them with pleasurewhile they were talking, and who expected to see the effect of MissDashwood's communication, in such an instantaneous gaiety on ColonelBrandon's side, as might have become a man in the bloom of youth, ofhope and happiness, saw him, with amazement, remain the whole eveningmore serious and thoughtful than usual.From a night of more sleep than she had expected, Marianne awoke thenext morning to the same consciousness of misery in which she hadclosed her eyes.Elinor encouraged her as much as possible to talk of what she felt; andbefore breakfast was ready, they had gone through the subject again andagain; and with the same steady conviction and affectionate counsel onElinor's side, the same impetuous feelings and varying opinions onMarianne's, as before.  Sometimes she could believe Willoughby to be asunfortunate and as innocent as herself, and at others, lost everyconsolation in the impossibility of acquitting him.  At one moment shewas absolutely indifferent to the observation of all the world, atanother she would seclude herself from it for ever, and at a thirdcould resist it with energy.  In one thing, however, she was uniform,when it came to the point, in avoiding, where it was possible, thepresence of Mrs. Jennings, and in a determined silence when obliged toendure it.  Her heart was hardened against the belief of Mrs.Jennings's entering into her sorrows with any compassion."No, no, no, it cannot be," she cried; "she cannot feel.  Her kindnessis not sympathy; her good-nature is not tenderness.  All that she wantsis gossip, and she only likes me now because I supply it."Elinor had not needed this to be assured of the injustice to which hersister was often led in her opinion of others, by the irritablerefinement of her own mind, and the too great importance placed by heron the delicacies of a strong sensibility, and the graces of a polishedmanner.  Like half the rest of the world, if more than half there bethat are clever and good, Marianne, with excellent abilities and anexcellent disposition, was neither reasonable nor candid.  She expectedfrom other people the same opinions and feelings as her own, and shejudged of their motives by the immediate effect of their actions onherself.  Thus a circumstance occurred, while the sisters were togetherin their own room after breakfast, which sunk the heart of Mrs.Jennings still lower in her estimation; because, through her ownweakness, it chanced to prove a source of fresh pain to herself, thoughMrs. Jennings was governed in it by an impulse of the utmost goodwill.With a letter in her outstretched hand, and countenance gaily smiling,from the persuasion of bringing comfort, she entered their room, saying,"Now, my dear, I bring you something that I am sure will do you good."Marianne heard enough.  In one moment her imagination placed before hera letter from Willoughby, full of tenderness and contrition,explanatory of all that had passed, satisfactory, convincing; andinstantly followed by Willoughby himself, rushing eagerly into the roomto inforce, at her feet, by the eloquence of his eyes, the assurancesof his letter.  The work of one moment was destroyed by the next.  Thehand writing of her mother, never till then unwelcome, was before her;and, in the acuteness of the disappointment which followed such anecstasy of more than hope, she felt as if, till that instant, she hadnever suffered.The cruelty of Mrs. Jennings no language, within her reach in hermoments of happiest eloquence, could have expressed; and now she couldreproach her only by the tears which streamed from her eyes withpassionate violence--a reproach, however, so entirely lost on itsobject, that after many expressions of pity, she withdrew, stillreferring her to the letter of comfort.  But the letter, when she wascalm enough to read it, brought little comfort.  Willoughby filledevery page.  Her mother, still confident of their engagement, andrelying as warmly as ever on his constancy, had only been roused byElinor's application, to intreat from Marianne greater openness towardsthem both; and this, with such tenderness towards her, such affectionfor Willoughby, and such a conviction of their future happiness in eachother, that she wept with agony through the whole of it.All her impatience to be at home again now returned; her mother wasdearer to her than ever; dearer through the very excess of her mistakenconfidence in Willoughby, and she was wildly urgent to be gone.Elinor, unable herself to determine whether it were better for Marianneto be in London or at Barton, offered no counsel of her own except ofpatience till their mother's wishes could be known; and at length sheobtained her sister's consent to wait for that knowledge.Mrs. Jennings left them earlier than usual; for she could not be easytill the Middletons and Palmers were able to grieve as much as herself;and positively refusing Elinor's offered attendance, went out alone forthe rest of the morning.  Elinor, with a very heavy heart, aware of thepain she was going to communicate, and perceiving, by Marianne'sletter, how ill she had succeeded in laying any foundation for it, thensat down to write her mother an account of what had passed, and entreather directions for the future; while Marianne, who came into thedrawing-room on Mrs. Jennings's going away, remained fixed at the tablewhere Elinor wrote, watching the advancement of her pen, grieving overher for the hardship of such a task, and grieving still more fondlyover its effect on her mother.In this manner they had continued about a quarter of an hour, whenMarianne, whose nerves could not then bear any sudden noise, wasstartled by a rap at the door."Who can this be?" cried Elinor.  "So early too! I thought we HAD beensafe."Marianne moved to the window--"It is Colonel Brandon!" said she, with vexation.  "We are never safefrom HIM.""He will not come in, as Mrs. Jennings is from home.""I will not trust to THAT," retreating to her own room.  "A man who hasnothing to do with his own time has no conscience in his intrusion onthat of others."The event proved her conjecture right, though it was founded oninjustice and error; for Colonel Brandon DID come in; and Elinor, whowas convinced that solicitude for Marianne brought him thither, and whosaw THAT solicitude in his disturbed and melancholy look, and in hisanxious though brief inquiry after her, could not forgive her sisterfor esteeming him so lightly."I met Mrs. Jennings in Bond Street," said he, after the firstsalutation, "and she encouraged me to come on; and I was the moreeasily encouraged, because I thought it probable that I might find youalone, which I was very desirous of doing.  My object--my wish--my solewish in desiring it--I hope, I believe it is--is to be a means ofgiving comfort;--no, I must not say comfort--not present comfort--butconviction, lasting conviction to your sister's mind.  My regard forher, for yourself, for your mother--will you allow me to prove it, byrelating some circumstances which nothing but a VERY sincereregard--nothing but an earnest desire of being useful--I think I amjustified--though where so many hours have been spent in convincingmyself that I am right, is there not some reason to fear I may bewrong?" He stopped."I understand you," said Elinor.  "You have something to tell me of Mr.Willoughby, that will open his character farther.  Your telling it willbe the greatest act of friendship that can be shewn Marianne.  MYgratitude will be insured immediately by any information tending tothat end, and HERS must be gained by it in time.  Pray, pray let mehear it.""You shall; and, to be brief, when I quitted Barton last October,--butthis will give you no idea--I must go farther back.  You will find me avery awkward narrator, Miss Dashwood; I hardly know where to begin.  Ashort account of myself, I believe, will be necessary, and it SHALL bea short one.  On such a subject," sighing heavily, "can I have littletemptation to be diffuse."He stopt a moment for recollection, and then, with another sigh, wenton."You have probably entirely forgotten a conversation--(it is not to besupposed that it could make any impression on you)--a conversationbetween us one evening at Barton Park--it was the evening of adance--in which I alluded to a lady I had once known, as resembling, insome measure, your sister Marianne.""Indeed," answered Elinor, "I have NOT forgotten it." He looked pleasedby this remembrance, and added,"If I am not deceived by the uncertainty, the partiality of tenderrecollection, there is a very strong resemblance between them, as wellin mind as person.  The same warmth of heart, the same eagerness offancy and spirits.  This lady was one of my nearest relations, anorphan from her infancy, and under the guardianship of my father.  Ourages were nearly the same, and from our earliest years we wereplayfellows and friends.  I cannot remember the time when I did notlove Eliza; and my affection for her, as we grew up, was such, asperhaps, judging from my present forlorn and cheerless gravity, youmight think me incapable of having ever felt.  Hers, for me, was, Ibelieve, fervent as the attachment of your sister to Mr. Willoughby andit was, though from a different cause, no less unfortunate.  Atseventeen she was lost to me for ever.  She was married--marriedagainst her inclination to my brother.  Her fortune was large, and ourfamily estate much encumbered.  And this, I fear, is all that can besaid for the conduct of one, who was at once her uncle and guardian.My brother did not deserve her; he did not even love her.  I had hopedthat her regard for me would support her under any difficulty, and forsome time it did; but at last the misery of her situation, for sheexperienced great unkindness, overcame all her resolution, and thoughshe had promised me that nothing--but how blindly I relate!  I havenever told you how this was brought on.  We were within a few hours ofeloping together for Scotland.  The treachery, or the folly, of mycousin's maid betrayed us.  I was banished to the house of a relationfar distant, and she was allowed no liberty, no society, no amusement,till my father's point was gained.  I had depended on her fortitude toofar, and the blow was a severe one--but had her marriage been happy, soyoung as I then was, a few months must have reconciled me to it, or atleast I should not have now to lament it.  This however was not thecase.  My brother had no regard for her; his pleasures were not whatthey ought to have been, and from the first he treated her unkindly.The consequence of this, upon a mind so young, so lively, soinexperienced as Mrs. Brandon's, was but too natural.  She resignedherself at first to all the misery of her situation; and happy had itbeen if she had not lived to overcome those regrets which theremembrance of me occasioned.  But can we wonder that, with such ahusband to provoke inconstancy, and without a friend to advise orrestrain her (for my father lived only a few months after theirmarriage, and I was with my regiment in the East Indies) she shouldfall?  Had I remained in England, perhaps--but I meant to promote thehappiness of both by removing from her for years, and for that purposehad procured my exchange.  The shock which her marriage had given me,"he continued, in a voice of great agitation, "was of triflingweight--was nothing to what I felt when I heard, about two yearsafterwards, of her divorce.  It was THAT which threw this gloom,--evennow the recollection of what I suffered--"He could say no more, and rising hastily walked for a few minutes aboutthe room.  Elinor, affected by his relation, and still more by hisdistress, could not speak.  He saw her concern, and coming to her, tookher hand, pressed it, and kissed it with grateful respect.  A fewminutes more of silent exertion enabled him to proceed with composure."It was nearly three years after this unhappy period before I returnedto England.  My first care, when I DID arrive, was of course to seekfor her; but the search was as fruitless as it was melancholy.  I couldnot trace her beyond her first seducer, and there was every reason tofear that she had removed from him only to sink deeper in a life ofsin.  Her legal allowance was not adequate to her fortune, norsufficient for her comfortable maintenance, and I learnt from mybrother that the power of receiving it had been made over some monthsbefore to another person.  He imagined, and calmly could he imagine it,that her extravagance, and consequent distress, had obliged her todispose of it for some immediate relief.  At last, however, and after Ihad been six months in England, I DID find her.  Regard for a formerservant of my own, who had since fallen into misfortune, carried me tovisit him in a spunging-house, where he was confined for debt; andthere, in the same house, under a similar confinement, was my unfortunatesister.  So altered--so faded--worn down by acute suffering of everykind! hardly could I believe the melancholy and sickly figure beforeme, to be the remains of the lovely, blooming, healthful girl, on whomI had once doted.  What I endured in so beholding her--but I have noright to wound your feelings by attempting to describe it--I havepained you too much already.  That she was, to all appearance, in thelast stage of a consumption, was--yes, in such a situation it was mygreatest comfort.  Life could do nothing for her, beyond giving timefor a better preparation for death; and that was given.  I saw herplaced in comfortable lodgings, and under proper attendants; I visitedher every day during the rest of her short life: I was with her in herlast moments."Again he stopped to recover himself; and Elinor spoke her feelings inan exclamation of tender concern, at the fate of his unfortunate friend."Your sister, I hope, cannot be offended," said he, "by the resemblanceI have fancied between her and my poor disgraced relation.  Theirfates, their fortunes, cannot be the same; and had the natural sweetdisposition of the one been guarded by a firmer mind, or a happiermarriage, she might have been all that you will live to see the otherbe.  But to what does all this lead?  I seem to have been distressingyou for nothing.  Ah! Miss Dashwood--a subject such as this--untouchedfor fourteen years--it is dangerous to handle it at all!  I WILL bemore collected--more concise.  She left to my care her only child, alittle girl, the offspring of her first guilty connection, who was thenabout three years old.  She loved the child, and had always kept itwith her.  It was a valued, a precious trust to me; and gladly would Ihave discharged it in the strictest sense, by watching over hereducation myself, had the nature of our situations allowed it; but Ihad no family, no home; and my little Eliza was therefore placed atschool.  I saw her there whenever I could, and after the death of mybrother, (which happened about five years ago, and which left to me thepossession of the family property,) she visited me at Delaford.  Icalled her a distant relation; but I am well aware that I have ingeneral been suspected of a much nearer connection with her.  It is nowthree years ago (she had just reached her fourteenth year,) that Iremoved her from school, to place her under the care of a veryrespectable woman, residing in Dorsetshire, who had the charge of fouror five other girls of about the same time of life; and for two years Ihad every reason to be pleased with her situation.  But last February,almost a twelvemonth back, she suddenly disappeared.  I had allowedher, (imprudently, as it has since turned out,) at her earnest desire,to go to Bath with one of her young friends, who was attending herfather there for his health.  I knew him to be a very good sort of man,and I thought well of his daughter--better than she deserved, for, witha most obstinate and ill-judged secrecy, she would tell nothing, wouldgive no clue, though she certainly knew all.  He, her father, awell-meaning, but not a quick-sighted man, could really, I believe,give no information; for he had been generally confined to the house,while the girls were ranging over the town and making what acquaintancethey chose; and he tried to convince me, as thoroughly as he wasconvinced himself, of his daughter's being entirely unconcerned in thebusiness.  In short, I could learn nothing but that she was gone; allthe rest, for eight long months, was left to conjecture.  What Ithought, what I feared, may be imagined; and what I suffered too.""Good heavens!" cried Elinor, "could it be--could Willoughby!"--"The first news that reached me of her," he continued, "came in aletter from herself, last October.  It was forwarded to me fromDelaford, and I received it on the very morning of our intended partyto Whitwell; and this was the reason of my leaving Barton so suddenly,which I am sure must at the time have appeared strange to every body,and which I believe gave offence to some.  Little did Mr. Willoughbyimagine, I suppose, when his looks censured me for incivility inbreaking up the party, that I was called away to the relief of one whomhe had made poor and miserable; but HAD he known it, what would it haveavailed?  Would he have been less gay or less happy in the smiles ofyour sister?  No, he had already done that, which no man who CAN feelfor another would do.  He had left the girl whose youth and innocencehe had seduced, in a situation of the utmost distress, with nocreditable home, no help, no friends, ignorant of his address!  He hadleft her, promising to return; he neither returned, nor wrote, norrelieved her.""This is beyond every thing!" exclaimed Elinor."His character is now before you; expensive, dissipated, and worse thanboth.  Knowing all this, as I have now known it many weeks, guess whatI must have felt on seeing your sister as fond of him as ever, and onbeing assured that she was to marry him: guess what I must have feltfor all your sakes.  When I came to you last week and found you alone,I came determined to know the truth; though irresolute what to do whenit WAS known.  My behaviour must have seemed strange to you then; butnow you will comprehend it.  To suffer you all to be so deceived; tosee your sister--but what could I do?  I had no hope of interferingwith success; and sometimes I thought your sister's influence might yetreclaim him.  But now, after such dishonorable usage, who can tell whatwere his designs on her.  Whatever they may have been, however, she maynow, and hereafter doubtless WILL turn with gratitude towards her owncondition, when she compares it with that of my poor Eliza, when sheconsiders the wretched and hopeless situation of this poor girl, andpictures her to herself, with an affection for him so strong, still asstrong as her own, and with a mind tormented by self-reproach, whichmust attend her through life.  Surely this comparison must have its usewith her.  She will feel her own sufferings to be nothing.  Theyproceed from no misconduct, and can bring no disgrace.  On thecontrary, every friend must be made still more her friend by them.Concern for her unhappiness, and respect for her fortitude under it,must strengthen every attachment.  Use your own discretion, however, incommunicating to her what I have told you.  You must know best whatwill be its effect; but had I not seriously, and from my heart believedit might be of service, might lessen her regrets, I would not havesuffered myself to trouble you with this account of my familyafflictions, with a recital which may seem to have been intended toraise myself at the expense of others."Elinor's thanks followed this speech with grateful earnestness;attended too with the assurance of her expecting material advantage toMarianne, from the communication of what had passed."I have been more pained," said she, "by her endeavors to acquit himthan by all the rest; for it irritates her mind more than the mostperfect conviction of his unworthiness can do.  Now, though at firstshe will suffer much, I am sure she will soon become easier.  Haveyou," she continued, after a short silence, "ever seen Mr. Willoughbysince you left him at Barton?""Yes," he replied gravely, "once I have.  One meeting was unavoidable."Elinor, startled by his manner, looked at him anxiously, saying,"What? have you met him to--""I could meet him no other way.  Eliza had confessed to me, though mostreluctantly, the name of her lover; and when he returned to town, whichwas within a fortnight after myself, we met by appointment, he todefend, I to punish his conduct.  We returned unwounded, and themeeting, therefore, never got abroad."Elinor sighed over the fancied necessity of this; but to a man and asoldier she presumed not to censure it."Such," said Colonel Brandon, after a pause, "has been the unhappyresemblance between the fate of mother and daughter! and so imperfectlyhave I discharged my trust!""Is she still in town?""No; as soon as she recovered from her lying-in, for I found her nearher delivery, I removed her and her child into the country, and thereshe remains."Recollecting, soon afterwards, that he was probably dividing Elinorfrom her sister, he put an end to his visit, receiving from her againthe same grateful acknowledgments, and leaving her full of compassionand esteem for him.When the particulars of this conversation were repeated by MissDashwood to her sister, as they very soon were, the effect on her wasnot entirely such as the former had hoped to see.  Not that Marianneappeared to distrust the truth of any part of it, for she listened toit all with the most steady and submissive attention, made neitherobjection nor remark, attempted no vindication of Willoughby, andseemed to shew by her tears that she felt it to be impossible.  Butthough this behaviour assured Elinor that the conviction of this guiltWAS carried home to her mind, though she saw with satisfaction theeffect of it, in her no longer avoiding Colonel Brandon when he called,in her speaking to him, even voluntarily speaking, with a kind ofcompassionate respect, and though she saw her spirits less violentlyirritated than before, she did not see her less wretched.  Her mind didbecome settled, but it was settled in a gloomy dejection.  She felt theloss of Willoughby's character yet more heavily than she had felt theloss of his heart; his seduction and desertion of Miss Williams, themisery of that poor girl, and the doubt of what his designs might ONCEhave been on herself, preyed altogether so much on her spirits, thatshe could not bring herself to speak of what she felt even to Elinor;and, brooding over her sorrows in silence, gave more pain to her sisterthan could have been communicated by the most open and most frequentconfession of them.To give the feelings or the language of Mrs. Dashwood on receiving andanswering Elinor's letter would be only to give a repetition of whather daughters had already felt and said; of a disappointment hardlyless painful than Marianne's, and an indignation even greater thanElinor's.  Long letters from her, quickly succeeding each other,arrived to tell all that she suffered and thought; to express heranxious solicitude for Marianne, and entreat she would bear up withfortitude under this misfortune.  Bad indeed must the nature ofMarianne's affliction be, when her mother could talk of fortitude!mortifying and humiliating must be the origin of those regrets, whichSHE could wish her not to indulge!Against the interest of her own individual comfort, Mrs. Dashwood haddetermined that it would be better for Marianne to be any where, atthat time, than at Barton, where every thing within her view would bebringing back the past in the strongest and most afflicting manner, byconstantly placing Willoughby before her, such as she had always seenhim there.  She recommended it to her daughters, therefore, by allmeans not to shorten their visit to Mrs. Jennings; the length of which,though never exactly fixed, had been expected by all to comprise atleast five or six weeks.  A variety of occupations, of objects, and ofcompany, which could not be procured at Barton, would be inevitablethere, and might yet, she hoped, cheat Marianne, at times, into someinterest beyond herself, and even into some amusement, much as theideas of both might now be spurned by her.From all danger of seeing Willoughby again, her mother considered herto be at least equally safe in town as in the country, since hisacquaintance must now be dropped by all who called themselves herfriends.  Design could never bring them in each other's way: negligencecould never leave them exposed to a surprise; and chance had less inits favour in the crowd of London than even in the retirement ofBarton, where it might force him before her while paying that visit atAllenham on his marriage, which Mrs. Dashwood, from foreseeing at firstas a probable event, had brought herself to expect as a certain one.She had yet another reason for wishing her children to remain wherethey were; a letter from her son-in-law had told her that he and hiswife were to be in town before the middle of February, and she judgedit right that they should sometimes see their brother.Marianne had promised to be guided by her mother's opinion, and shesubmitted to it therefore without opposition, though it provedperfectly different from what she wished and expected, though she feltit to be entirely wrong, formed on mistaken grounds, and that byrequiring her longer continuance in London it deprived her of the onlypossible alleviation of her wretchedness, the personal sympathy of hermother, and doomed her to such society and such scenes as must preventher ever knowing a moment's rest.But it was a matter of great consolation to her, that what brought evilto herself would bring good to her sister; and Elinor, on the otherhand, suspecting that it would not be in her power to avoid Edwardentirely, comforted herself by thinking, that though their longer staywould therefore militate against her own happiness, it would be betterfor Marianne than an immediate return into Devonshire.Her carefulness in guarding her sister from ever hearing Willoughby'sname mentioned, was not thrown away.  Marianne, though without knowingit herself, reaped all its advantage; for neither Mrs. Jennings, norSir John, nor even Mrs. Palmer herself, ever spoke of him before her.Elinor wished that the same forbearance could have extended towardsherself, but that was impossible, and she was obliged to listen dayafter day to the indignation of them all.Sir John, could not have thought it possible.  "A man of whom he hadalways had such reason to think well!  Such a good-natured fellow!  Hedid not believe there was a bolder rider in England!  It was anunaccountable business.  He wished him at the devil with all his heart.He would not speak another word to him, meet him where he might, forall the world!  No, not if it were to be by the side of Barton covert,and they were kept watching for two hours together.  Such a scoundrelof a fellow! such a deceitful dog!  It was only the last time they metthat he had offered him one of Folly's puppies! and this was the end ofit!"Mrs. Palmer, in her way, was equally angry.  "She was determined todrop his acquaintance immediately, and she was very thankful that shehad never been acquainted with him at all.  She wished with all herheart Combe Magna was not so near Cleveland; but it did not signify,for it was a great deal too far off to visit; she hated him so muchthat she was resolved never to mention his name again, and she shouldtell everybody she saw, how good-for-nothing he was."The rest of Mrs. Palmer's sympathy was shewn in procuring all theparticulars in her power of the approaching marriage, and communicatingthem to Elinor.  She could soon tell at what coachmaker's the newcarriage was building, by what painter Mr. Willoughby's portrait wasdrawn, and at what warehouse Miss Grey's clothes might be seen.The calm and polite unconcern of Lady Middleton on the occasion was ahappy relief to Elinor's spirits, oppressed as they often were by theclamorous kindness of the others.  It was a great comfort to her to besure of exciting no interest in ONE person at least among their circleof friends: a great comfort to know that there was ONE who would meether without feeling any curiosity after particulars, or any anxiety forher sister's health.Every qualification is raised at times, by the circumstances of themoment, to more than its real value; and she was sometimes worried downby officious condolence to rate good-breeding as more indispensable tocomfort than good-nature.Lady Middleton expressed her sense of the affair about once every day,or twice, if the subject occurred very often, by saying, "It is veryshocking, indeed!" and by the means of this continual though gentlevent, was able not only to see the Miss Dashwoods from the firstwithout the smallest emotion, but very soon to see them withoutrecollecting a word of the matter; and having thus supported thedignity of her own sex, and spoken her decided censure of what waswrong in the other, she thought herself at liberty to attend to theinterest of her own assemblies, and therefore determined (though ratheragainst the opinion of Sir John) that as Mrs. Willoughby would at oncebe a woman of elegance and fortune, to leave her card with her as soonas she married.Colonel Brandon's delicate, unobtrusive enquiries were never unwelcometo Miss Dashwood.  He had abundantly earned the privilege of intimatediscussion of her sister's disappointment, by the friendly zeal withwhich he had endeavoured to soften it, and they always conversed withconfidence.  His chief reward for the painful exertion of disclosingpast sorrows and present humiliations, was given in the pitying eyewith which Marianne sometimes observed him, and the gentleness of hervoice whenever (though it did not often happen) she was obliged, orcould oblige herself to speak to him.  THESE assured him that hisexertion had produced an increase of good-will towards himself, andTHESE gave Elinor hopes of its being farther augmented hereafter; butMrs. Jennings, who knew nothing of all this, who knew only that theColonel continued as grave as ever, and that she could neither prevailon him to make the offer himself, nor commission her to make it forhim, began, at the end of two days, to think that, instead ofMidsummer, they would not be married till Michaelmas, and by the end ofa week that it would not be a match at all.  The good understandingbetween the Colonel and Miss Dashwood seemed rather to declare that thehonours of the mulberry-tree, the canal, and the yew arbour, would allbe made over to HER; and Mrs. Jennings had, for some time ceased tothink at all of Mrs. Ferrars.Early in February, within a fortnight from the receipt of Willoughby'sletter, Elinor had the painful office of informing her sister that hewas married.  She had taken care to have the intelligence conveyed toherself, as soon as it was known that the ceremony was over, as she wasdesirous that Marianne should not receive the first notice of it fromthe public papers, which she saw her eagerly examining every morning.She received the news with resolute composure; made no observation onit, and at first shed no tears; but after a short time they would burstout, and for the rest of the day, she was in a state hardly lesspitiable than when she first learnt to expect the event.The Willoughbys left town as soon as they were married; and Elinor nowhoped, as there could be no danger of her seeing either of them, toprevail on her sister, who had never yet left the house since the blowfirst fell, to go out again by degrees as she had done before.About this time the two Miss Steeles, lately arrived at their cousin'shouse in Bartlett's Buildings, Holburn, presented themselves againbefore their more grand relations in Conduit and Berkeley Streets; andwere welcomed by them all with great cordiality.Elinor only was sorry to see them.  Their presence always gave herpain, and she hardly knew how to make a very gracious return to theoverpowering delight of Lucy in finding her STILL in town."I should have been quite disappointed if I had not found you hereSTILL," said she repeatedly, with a strong emphasis on the word.  "ButI always thought I SHOULD.  I was almost sure you would not leaveLondon yet awhile; though you TOLD me, you know, at Barton, that youshould not stay above a MONTH.  But I thought, at the time, that youwould most likely change your mind when it came to the point.  It wouldhave been such a great pity to have went away before your brother andsister came.  And now to be sure you will be in no hurry to be gone.  Iam amazingly glad you did not keep to YOUR WORD."Elinor perfectly understood her, and was forced to use all herself-command to make it appear that she did NOT."Well, my dear," said Mrs. Jennings, "and how did you travel?""Not in the stage, I assure you," replied Miss Steele, with quickexultation; "we came post all the way, and had a very smart beau toattend us.  Dr. Davies was coming to town, and so we thought we'd joinhim in a post-chaise; and he behaved very genteelly, and paid ten ortwelve shillings more than we did.""Oh, oh!" cried Mrs. Jennings; "very pretty, indeed! and the Doctor isa single man, I warrant you.""There now," said Miss Steele, affectedly simpering, "everybody laughsat me so about the Doctor, and I cannot think why.  My cousins say theyare sure I have made a conquest; but for my part I declare I neverthink about him from one hour's end to another.  'Lord! here comes yourbeau, Nancy,' my cousin said t'other day, when she saw him crossing thestreet to the house.  My beau, indeed! said I--I cannot think who youmean.  The Doctor is no beau of mine.""Aye, aye, that is very pretty talking--but it won't do--the Doctor isthe man, I see.""No, indeed!" replied her cousin, with affected earnestness, "and I begyou will contradict it, if you ever hear it talked of."Mrs. Jennings directly gave her the gratifying assurance that shecertainly would NOT, and Miss Steele was made completely happy."I suppose you will go and stay with your brother and sister, MissDashwood, when they come to town," said Lucy, returning, after acessation of hostile hints, to the charge."No, I do not think we shall.""Oh, yes, I dare say you will."Elinor would not humour her by farther opposition."What a charming thing it is that Mrs. Dashwood can spare you both forso long a time together!""Long a time, indeed!" interposed Mrs. Jennings.  "Why, their visit isbut just begun!"Lucy was silenced."I am sorry we cannot see your sister, Miss Dashwood," said MissSteele.  "I am sorry she is not well--" for Marianne had left the roomon their arrival."You are very good.  My sister will be equally sorry to miss thepleasure of seeing you; but she has been very much plagued lately withnervous head-aches, which make her unfit for company or conversation.""Oh, dear, that is a great pity! but such old friends as Lucy andme!--I think she might see US; and I am sure we would not speak a word."Elinor, with great civility, declined the proposal.  Her sister wasperhaps laid down upon the bed, or in her dressing gown, and thereforenot able to come to them."Oh, if that's all," cried Miss Steele, "we can just as well go and seeHER."Elinor began to find this impertinence too much for her temper; but shewas saved the trouble of checking it, by Lucy's sharp reprimand, whichnow, as on many occasions, though it did not give much sweetness to themanners of one sister, was of advantage in governing those of the other.After some opposition, Marianne yielded to her sister's entreaties, andconsented to go out with her and Mrs. Jennings one morning for half anhour. She expressly conditioned, however, for paying no visits, andwould do no more than accompany them to Gray's in Sackville Street,where Elinor was carrying on a negotiation for the exchange of a fewold-fashioned jewels of her mother.When they stopped at the door, Mrs. Jennings recollected that there wasa lady at the other end of the street on whom she ought to call; and asshe had no business at Gray's, it was resolved, that while her youngfriends transacted their's, she should pay her visit and return forthem.On ascending the stairs, the Miss Dashwoods found so many people beforethem in the room, that there was not a person at liberty to tend totheir orders; and they were obliged to wait.  All that could be donewas, to sit down at that end of the counter which seemed to promise thequickest succession; one gentleman only was standing there, and it isprobable that Elinor was not without hope of exciting his politeness toa quicker despatch.  But the correctness of his eye, and the delicacyof his taste, proved to be beyond his politeness.  He was giving ordersfor a toothpick-case for himself, and till its size, shape, andornaments were determined, all of which, after examining and debatingfor a quarter of an hour over every toothpick-case in the shop, werefinally arranged by his own inventive fancy, he had no leisure tobestow any other attention on the two ladies, than what was comprisedin three or four very broad stares; a kind of notice which served toimprint on Elinor the remembrance of a person and face, of strong,natural, sterling insignificance, though adorned in the first style offashion.Marianne was spared from the troublesome feelings of contempt andresentment, on this impertinent examination of their features, and onthe puppyism of his manner in deciding on all the different horrors ofthe different toothpick-cases presented to his inspection, by remainingunconscious of it all; for she was as well able to collect her thoughtswithin herself, and be as ignorant of what was passing around her, inMr. Gray's shop, as in her own bedroom.At last the affair was decided.  The ivory, the gold, and the pearls,all received their appointment, and the gentleman having named the lastday on which his existence could be continued without the possession ofthe toothpick-case, drew on his gloves with leisurely care, andbestowing another glance on the Miss Dashwoods, but such a one asseemed rather to demand than express admiration, walked off with ahappy air of real conceit and affected indifference.Elinor lost no time in bringing her business forward, was on the pointof concluding it, when another gentleman presented himself at her side.She turned her eyes towards his face, and found him with some surpriseto be her brother.Their affection and pleasure in meeting was just enough to make a verycreditable appearance in Mr. Gray's shop.  John Dashwood was really farfrom being sorry to see his sisters again; it rather gave themsatisfaction; and his inquiries after their mother were respectful andattentive.Elinor found that he and Fanny had been in town two days."I wished very much to call upon you yesterday," said he, "but it wasimpossible, for we were obliged to take Harry to see the wild beasts atExeter Exchange; and we spent the rest of the day with Mrs. Ferrars.Harry was vastly pleased.  THIS morning I had fully intended to call onyou, if I could possibly find a spare half hour, but one has always somuch to do on first coming to town.  I am come here to bespeak Fanny aseal.  But tomorrow I think I shall certainly be able to call inBerkeley Street, and be introduced to your friend Mrs. Jennings.  Iunderstand she is a woman of very good fortune.  And the Middletonstoo, you must introduce me to THEM.  As my mother-in-law's relations, Ishall be happy to show them every respect.  They are excellentneighbours to you in the country, I understand.""Excellent indeed.  Their attention to our comfort, their friendlinessin every particular, is more than I can express.""I am extremely glad to hear it, upon my word; extremely glad indeed.But so it ought to be; they are people of large fortune, they arerelated to you, and every civility and accommodation that can serve tomake your situation pleasant might be reasonably expected.  And so youare most comfortably settled in your little cottage and want fornothing!  Edward brought us a most charming account of the place: themost complete thing of its kind, he said, that ever was, and you allseemed to enjoy it beyond any thing.  It was a great satisfaction to usto hear it, I assure you."Elinor did feel a little ashamed of her brother; and was not sorry tobe spared the necessity of answering him, by the arrival of Mrs.Jennings's servant, who came to tell her that his mistress waited forthem at the door.Mr. Dashwood attended them down stairs, was introduced to Mrs. Jenningsat the door of her carriage, and repeating his hope of being able tocall on them the next day, took leave.His visit was duly paid.  He came with a pretence at an apology fromtheir sister-in-law, for not coming too; "but she was so much engagedwith her mother, that really she had no leisure for going any where."Mrs. Jennings, however, assured him directly, that she should not standupon ceremony, for they were all cousins, or something like it, and sheshould certainly wait on Mrs. John Dashwood very soon, and bring hersisters to see her.  His manners to THEM, though calm, were perfectlykind; to Mrs. Jennings, most attentively civil; and on ColonelBrandon's coming in soon after himself, he eyed him with a curiositywhich seemed to say, that he only wanted to know him to be rich, to beequally civil to HIM.After staying with them half an hour, he asked Elinor to walk with himto Conduit Street, and introduce him to Sir John and Lady Middleton.The weather was remarkably fine, and she readily consented.  As soon asthey were out of the house, his enquiries began."Who is Colonel Brandon?  Is he a man of fortune?""Yes; he has very good property in Dorsetshire.""I am glad of it.  He seems a most gentlemanlike man; and I think,Elinor, I may congratulate you on the prospect of a very respectableestablishment in life.""Me, brother! what do you mean?""He likes you.  I observed him narrowly, and am convinced of it.  Whatis the amount of his fortune?""I believe about two thousand a year.""Two thousand a-year;" and then working himself up to a pitch ofenthusiastic generosity, he added, "Elinor, I wish with all my heart itwere TWICE as much, for your sake.""Indeed I believe you," replied Elinor; "but I am very sure thatColonel Brandon has not the smallest wish of marrying ME.""You are mistaken, Elinor; you are very much mistaken.  A very littletrouble on your side secures him.  Perhaps just at present he may beundecided; the smallness of your fortune may make him hang back; hisfriends may all advise him against it.  But some of those littleattentions and encouragements which ladies can so easily give will fixhim, in spite of himself.  And there can be no reason why you shouldnot try for him.  It is not to be supposed that any prior attachment onyour side--in short, you know as to an attachment of that kind, it isquite out of the question, the objections are insurmountable--you havetoo much sense not to see all that.  Colonel Brandon must be the man;and no civility shall be wanting on my part to make him pleased withyou and your family.  It is a match that must give universalsatisfaction.  In short, it is a kind of thing that"--lowering hisvoice to an important whisper--"will be exceedingly welcome to ALLPARTIES." Recollecting himself, however, he added, "That is, I mean tosay--your friends are all truly anxious to see you well settled; Fannyparticularly, for she has your interest very much at heart, I assureyou.  And her mother too, Mrs. Ferrars, a very good-natured woman, I amsure it would give her great pleasure; she said as much the other day."Elinor would not vouchsafe any answer."It would be something remarkable, now," he continued, "somethingdroll, if Fanny should have a brother and I a sister settling at thesame time.  And yet it is not very unlikely.""Is Mr. Edward Ferrars," said Elinor, with resolution, "going to bemarried?""It is not actually settled, but there is such a thing in agitation.He has a most excellent mother.  Mrs. Ferrars, with the utmostliberality, will come forward, and settle on him a thousand a year, ifthe match takes place.  The lady is the Hon. Miss Morton, only daughterof the late Lord Morton, with thirty thousand pounds.  A very desirableconnection on both sides, and I have not a doubt of its taking place intime.  A thousand a-year is a great deal for a mother to give away, tomake over for ever; but Mrs. Ferrars has a noble spirit.  To give youanother instance of her liberality:--The other day, as soon as we cameto town, aware that money could not be very plenty with us just now,she put bank-notes into Fanny's hands to the amount of two hundredpounds.  And extremely acceptable it is, for we must live at a greatexpense while we are here."He paused for her assent and compassion; and she forced herself to say,"Your expenses both in town and country must certainly be considerable;but your income is a large one.""Not so large, I dare say, as many people suppose.  I do not mean tocomplain, however; it is undoubtedly a comfortable one, and I hope willin time be better.  The enclosure of Norland Common, now carrying on,is a most serious drain.  And then I have made a little purchase withinthis half year; East Kingham Farm, you must remember the place, whereold Gibson used to live.  The land was so very desirable for me inevery respect, so immediately adjoining my own property, that I felt itmy duty to buy it.  I could not have answered it to my conscience tolet it fall into any other hands.  A man must pay for his convenience;and it HAS cost me a vast deal of money.""More than you think it really and intrinsically worth.""Why, I hope not that.  I might have sold it again, the next day, formore than I gave: but, with regard to the purchase-money, I might havebeen very unfortunate indeed; for the stocks were at that time so low,that if I had not happened to have the necessary sum in my banker'shands, I must have sold out to very great loss."Elinor could only smile."Other great and inevitable expenses too we have had on first coming toNorland.  Our respected father, as you well know, bequeathed all theStanhill effects that remained at Norland (and very valuable they were)to your mother.  Far be it from me to repine at his doing so; he had anundoubted right to dispose of his own property as he chose, but, inconsequence of it, we have been obliged to make large purchases oflinen, china, &c. to supply the place of what was taken away.  You mayguess, after all these expenses, how very far we must be from beingrich, and how acceptable Mrs. Ferrars's kindness is.""Certainly," said Elinor; "and assisted by her liberality, I hope youmay yet live to be in easy circumstances.""Another year or two may do much towards it," he gravely replied; "buthowever there is still a great deal to be done.  There is not a stonelaid of Fanny's green-house, and nothing but the plan of theflower-garden marked out.""Where is the green-house to be?""Upon the knoll behind the house.  The old walnut trees are all comedown to make room for it.  It will be a very fine object from manyparts of the park, and the flower-garden will slope down just beforeit, and be exceedingly pretty.  We have cleared away all the old thornsthat grew in patches over the brow."Elinor kept her concern and her censure to herself; and was verythankful that Marianne was not present, to share the provocation.Having now said enough to make his poverty clear, and to do away thenecessity of buying a pair of ear-rings for each of his sisters, in hisnext visit at Gray's his thoughts took a cheerfuller turn, and he beganto congratulate Elinor on having such a friend as Mrs. Jennings."She seems a most valuable woman indeed--Her house, her style ofliving, all bespeak an exceeding good income; and it is an acquaintancethat has not only been of great use to you hitherto, but in the end mayprove materially advantageous.--Her inviting you to town is certainly avast thing in your favour; and indeed, it speaks altogether so great aregard for you, that in all probability when she dies you will not beforgotten.-- She must have a great deal to leave.""Nothing at all, I should rather suppose; for she has only herjointure, which will descend to her children.""But it is not to be imagined that she lives up to her income.  Fewpeople of common prudence will do THAT; and whatever she saves, shewill be able to dispose of.""And do you not think it more likely that she should leave it to herdaughters, than to us?""Her daughters are both exceedingly well married, and therefore Icannot perceive the necessity of her remembering them farther.Whereas, in my opinion, by her taking so much notice of you, andtreating you in this kind of way, she has given you a sort of claim onher future consideration, which a conscientious woman would notdisregard.  Nothing can be kinder than her behaviour; and she canhardly do all this, without being aware of the expectation it raises.""But she raises none in those most concerned.  Indeed, brother, youranxiety for our welfare and prosperity carries you too far.""Why, to be sure," said he, seeming to recollect himself, "people havelittle, have very little in their power.  But, my dear Elinor, what isthe matter with Marianne?-- she looks very unwell, has lost her colour,and is grown quite thin.  Is she ill?""She is not well, she has had a nervous complaint on her for severalweeks.""I am sorry for that.  At her time of life, any thing of an illnessdestroys the bloom for ever!  Hers has been a very short one!  She wasas handsome a girl last September, as I ever saw; and as likely toattract the man.  There was something in her style of beauty, to pleasethem particularly.  I remember Fanny used to say that she would marrysooner and better than you did; not but what she is exceedingly fond ofYOU, but so it happened to strike her.  She will be mistaken, however.I question whether Marianne NOW, will marry a man worth more than fiveor six hundred a-year, at the utmost, and I am very much deceived ifYOU do not do better.  Dorsetshire!  I know very little of Dorsetshire;but, my dear Elinor, I shall be exceedingly glad to know more of it;and I think I can answer for your having Fanny and myself among theearliest and best pleased of your visitors."Elinor tried very seriously to convince him that there was nolikelihood of her marrying Colonel Brandon; but it was an expectationof too much pleasure to himself to be relinquished, and he was reallyresolved on seeking an intimacy with that gentleman, and promoting themarriage by every possible attention.  He had just compunction enoughfor having done nothing for his sisters himself, to be exceedinglyanxious that everybody else should do a great deal; and an offer fromColonel Brandon, or a legacy from Mrs. Jennings, was the easiest meansof atoning for his own neglect.They were lucky enough to find Lady Middleton at home, and Sir Johncame in before their visit ended.  Abundance of civilities passed onall sides.  Sir John was ready to like anybody, and though Mr. Dashwooddid not seem to know much about horses, he soon set him down as a verygood-natured fellow: while Lady Middleton saw enough of fashion in hisappearance to think his acquaintance worth having; and Mr. Dashwoodwent away delighted with both."I shall have a charming account to carry to Fanny," said he, as hewalked back with his sister.  "Lady Middleton is really a most elegantwoman!  Such a woman as I am sure Fanny will be glad to know.  And Mrs.Jennings too, an exceedingly well-behaved woman, though not so elegantas her daughter.  Your sister need not have any scruple even ofvisiting HER, which, to say the truth, has been a little the case, andvery naturally; for we only knew that Mrs. Jennings was the widow of aman who had got all his money in a low way; and Fanny and Mrs. Ferrarswere both strongly prepossessed, that neither she nor her daughterswere such kind of women as Fanny would like to associate with.  But nowI can carry her a most satisfactory account of both."Mrs. John Dashwood had so much confidence in her husband's judgment,that she waited the very next day both on Mrs. Jennings and herdaughter; and her confidence was rewarded by finding even the former,even the woman with whom her sisters were staying, by no means unworthyher notice; and as for Lady Middleton, she found her one of the mostcharming women in the world!Lady Middleton was equally pleased with Mrs. Dashwood.  There was akind of cold hearted selfishness on both sides, which mutuallyattracted them; and they sympathised with each other in an insipidpropriety of demeanor, and a general want of understanding.The same manners, however, which recommended Mrs. John Dashwood to thegood opinion of Lady Middleton did not suit the fancy of Mrs. Jennings,and to HER she appeared nothing more than a little proud-looking womanof uncordial address, who met her husband's sisters without anyaffection, and almost without having anything to say to them; for ofthe quarter of an hour bestowed on Berkeley Street, she sat at leastseven minutes and a half in silence.Elinor wanted very much to know, though she did not chuse to ask,whether Edward was then in town; but nothing would have induced Fannyvoluntarily to mention his name before her, till able to tell her thathis marriage with Miss Morton was resolved on, or till her husband'sexpectations on Colonel Brandon were answered; because she believedthem still so very much attached to each other, that they could not betoo sedulously divided in word and deed on every occasion.  Theintelligence however, which SHE would not give, soon flowed fromanother quarter.  Lucy came very shortly to claim Elinor's compassionon being unable to see Edward, though he had arrived in town with Mr.and Mrs. Dashwood.  He dared not come to Bartlett's Buildings for fearof detection, and though their mutual impatience to meet, was not to betold, they could do nothing at present but write.Edward assured them himself of his being in town, within a very shorttime, by twice calling in Berkeley Street.  Twice was his card found onthe table, when they returned from their morning's engagements.  Elinorwas pleased that he had called; and still more pleased that she hadmissed him.The Dashwoods were so prodigiously delighted with the Middletons, that,though not much in the habit of giving anything, they determined togive them--a dinner; and soon after their acquaintance began, invitedthem to dine in Harley Street, where they had taken a very good housefor three months.  Their sisters and Mrs. Jennings were invitedlikewise, and John Dashwood was careful to secure Colonel Brandon, who,always glad to be where the Miss Dashwoods were, received his eagercivilities with some surprise, but much more pleasure.  They were tomeet Mrs. Ferrars; but Elinor could not learn whether her sons were tobe of the party.  The expectation of seeing HER, however, was enough tomake her interested in the engagement; for though she could now meetEdward's mother without that strong anxiety which had once promised toattend such an introduction, though she could now see her with perfectindifference as to her opinion of herself, her desire of being incompany with Mrs. Ferrars, her curiosity to know what she was like, wasas lively as ever.The interest with which she thus anticipated the party, was soonafterwards increased, more powerfully than pleasantly, by her hearingthat the Miss Steeles were also to be at it.So well had they recommended themselves to Lady Middleton, so agreeablehad their assiduities made them to her, that though Lucy was certainlynot so elegant, and her sister not even genteel, she was as ready asSir John to ask them to spend a week or two in Conduit Street; and ithappened to be particularly convenient to the Miss Steeles, as soon asthe Dashwoods' invitation was known, that their visit should begin afew days before the party took place.Their claims to the notice of Mrs. John Dashwood, as the nieces of thegentleman who for many years had had the care of her brother, might nothave done much, however, towards procuring them seats at her table; butas Lady Middleton's guests they must be welcome; and Lucy, who had longwanted to be personally known to the family, to have a nearer view oftheir characters and her own difficulties, and to have an opportunityof endeavouring to please them, had seldom been happier in her life,than she was on receiving Mrs. John Dashwood's card.On Elinor its effect was very different.  She began immediately todetermine, that Edward who lived with his mother, must be asked as hismother was, to a party given by his sister; and to see him for thefirst time, after all that passed, in the company of Lucy!--she hardlyknew how she could bear it!These apprehensions, perhaps, were not founded entirely on reason, andcertainly not at all on truth.  They were relieved however, not by herown recollection, but by the good will of Lucy, who believed herself tobe inflicting a severe disappointment when she told her that Edwardcertainly would not be in Harley Street on Tuesday, and even hoped tobe carrying the pain still farther by persuading her that he was keptaway by the extreme affection for herself, which he could not concealwhen they were together.The important Tuesday came that was to introduce the two young ladiesto this formidable mother-in-law."Pity me, dear Miss Dashwood!" said Lucy, as they walked up the stairstogether--for the Middletons arrived so directly after Mrs. Jennings,that they all followed the servant at the same time--"There is nobodyhere but you, that can feel for me.--I declare I can hardly stand.Good gracious!--In a moment I shall see the person that all myhappiness depends on--that is to be my mother!"--Elinor could have given her immediate relief by suggesting thepossibility of its being Miss Morton's mother, rather than her own,whom they were about to behold; but instead of doing that, she assuredher, and with great sincerity, that she did pity her--to the utteramazement of Lucy, who, though really uncomfortable herself, hoped atleast to be an object of irrepressible envy to Elinor.Mrs. Ferrars was a little, thin woman, upright, even to formality, inher figure, and serious, even to sourness, in her aspect.  Hercomplexion was sallow; and her features small, without beauty, andnaturally without expression; but a lucky contraction of the brow hadrescued her countenance from the disgrace of insipidity, by giving itthe strong characters of pride and ill nature.  She was not a woman ofmany words; for, unlike people in general, she proportioned them to thenumber of her ideas; and of the few syllables that did escape her, notone fell to the share of Miss Dashwood, whom she eyed with the spiriteddetermination of disliking her at all events.Elinor could not NOW be made unhappy by this behaviour.-- A few monthsago it would have hurt her exceedingly; but it was not in Mrs. Ferrars'power to distress her by it now;--and the difference of her manners tothe Miss Steeles, a difference which seemed purposely made to humbleher more, only amused her.  She could not but smile to see thegraciousness of both mother and daughter towards the very person-- forLucy was particularly distinguished--whom of all others, had they knownas much as she did, they would have been most anxious to mortify; whileshe herself, who had comparatively no power to wound them, satpointedly slighted by both.  But while she smiled at a graciousness somisapplied, she could not reflect on the mean-spirited folly from whichit sprung, nor observe the studied attentions with which the MissSteeles courted its continuance, without thoroughly despising them allfour.Lucy was all exultation on being so honorably distinguished; and MissSteele wanted only to be teazed about Dr. Davies to be perfectly happy.The dinner was a grand one, the servants were numerous, and every thingbespoke the Mistress's inclination for show, and the Master's abilityto support it.  In spite of the improvements and additions which weremaking to the Norland estate, and in spite of its owner having oncebeen within some thousand pounds of being obliged to sell out at aloss, nothing gave any symptom of that indigence which he had tried toinfer from it;--no poverty of any kind, except of conversation,appeared--but there, the deficiency was considerable.  John Dashwoodhad not much to say for himself that was worth hearing, and his wifehad still less.  But there was no peculiar disgrace in this; for it wasvery much the case with the chief of their visitors, who almost alllaboured under one or other of these disqualifications for beingagreeable--Want of sense, either natural or improved--want ofelegance--want of spirits--or want of temper.When the ladies withdrew to the drawing-room after dinner, this povertywas particularly evident, for the gentlemen HAD supplied the discoursewith some variety--the variety of politics, inclosing land, andbreaking horses--but then it was all over; and one subject only engagedthe ladies till coffee came in, which was the comparative heights ofHarry Dashwood, and Lady Middleton's second son William, who werenearly of the same age.Had both the children been there, the affair might have been determinedtoo easily by measuring them at once; but as Harry only was present, itwas all conjectural assertion on both sides; and every body had a rightto be equally positive in their opinion, and to repeat it over and overagain as often as they liked.The parties stood thus:The two mothers, though each really convinced that her own son was thetallest, politely decided in favour of the other.The two grandmothers, with not less partiality, but more sincerity,were equally earnest in support of their own descendant.Lucy, who was hardly less anxious to please one parent than the other,thought the boys were both remarkably tall for their age, and could notconceive that there could be the smallest difference in the worldbetween them; and Miss Steele, with yet greater address gave it, asfast as she could, in favour of each.Elinor, having once delivered her opinion on William's side, by whichshe offended Mrs. Ferrars and Fanny still more, did not see thenecessity of enforcing it by any farther assertion; and Marianne, whencalled on for hers, offended them all, by declaring that she had noopinion to give, as she had never thought about it.Before her removing from Norland, Elinor had painted a very pretty pairof screens for her sister-in-law, which being now just mounted andbrought home, ornamented her present drawing room; and these screens,catching the eye of John Dashwood on his following the other gentlemeninto the room, were officiously handed by him to Colonel Brandon forhis admiration."These are done by my eldest sister," said he; "and you, as a man oftaste, will, I dare say, be pleased with them.  I do not know whetheryou have ever happened to see any of her performances before, but sheis in general reckoned to draw extremely well."The Colonel, though disclaiming all pretensions to connoisseurship,warmly admired the screens, as he would have done any thing painted byMiss Dashwood; and on the curiosity of the others being of courseexcited, they were handed round for general inspection.  Mrs. Ferrars,not aware of their being Elinor's work, particularly requested to lookat them; and after they had received gratifying testimony of LadyMiddletons's approbation, Fanny presented them to her mother,considerately informing her, at the same time, that they were done byMiss Dashwood."Hum"--said Mrs. Ferrars--"very pretty,"--and without regarding them atall, returned them to her daughter.Perhaps Fanny thought for a moment that her mother had been quite rudeenough,--for, colouring a little, she immediately said,"They are very pretty, ma'am--an't they?" But then again, the dread ofhaving been too civil, too encouraging herself, probably came over her,for she presently added,"Do you not think they are something in Miss Morton's style ofpainting, Ma'am?--She DOES paint most delightfully!--How beautifullyher last landscape is done!""Beautifully indeed!  But SHE does every thing well."Marianne could not bear this.--She was already greatly displeased withMrs. Ferrars; and such ill-timed praise of another, at Elinor'sexpense, though she had not any notion of what was principally meant byit, provoked her immediately to say with warmth,"This is admiration of a very particular kind!--what is Miss Morton tous?--who knows, or who cares, for her?--it is Elinor of whom WE thinkand speak."And so saying, she took the screens out of her sister-in-law's hands,to admire them herself as they ought to be admired.Mrs. Ferrars looked exceedingly angry, and drawing herself up morestiffly than ever, pronounced in retort this bitter philippic, "MissMorton is Lord Morton's daughter."Fanny looked very angry too, and her husband was all in a fright at hissister's audacity.  Elinor was much more hurt by Marianne's warmth thanshe had been by what produced it; but Colonel Brandon's eyes, as theywere fixed on Marianne, declared that he noticed only what was amiablein it, the affectionate heart which could not bear to see a sisterslighted in the smallest point.Marianne's feelings did not stop here.  The cold insolence of Mrs.Ferrars's general behaviour to her sister, seemed, to her, to foretellsuch difficulties and distresses to Elinor, as her own wounded hearttaught her to think of with horror; and urged by a strong impulse ofaffectionate sensibility, she moved after a moment, to her sister'schair, and putting one arm round her neck, and one cheek close to hers,said in a low, but eager, voice,"Dear, dear Elinor, don't mind them.  Don't let them make YOU unhappy."She could say no more; her spirits were quite overcome, and hiding herface on Elinor's shoulder, she burst into tears.  Every body'sattention was called, and almost every body was concerned.--ColonelBrandon rose up and went to them without knowing what he did.--Mrs.Jennings, with a very intelligent "Ah! poor dear," immediately gave herher salts; and Sir John felt so desperately enraged against the authorof this nervous distress, that he instantly changed his seat to oneclose by Lucy Steele, and gave her, in a whisper, a brief account ofthe whole shocking affair.In a few minutes, however, Marianne was recovered enough to put an endto the bustle, and sit down among the rest; though her spirits retainedthe impression of what had passed, the whole evening."Poor Marianne!" said her brother to Colonel Brandon, in a low voice,as soon as he could secure his attention,-- "She has not such goodhealth as her sister,--she is very nervous,--she has not Elinor'sconstitution;--and one must allow that there is something very tryingto a young woman who HAS BEEN a beauty in the loss of her personalattractions.  You would not think it perhaps, but Marianne WASremarkably handsome a few months ago; quite as handsome as Elinor.--Now you see it is all gone."Elinor's curiosity to see Mrs. Ferrars was satisfied.-- She had foundin her every thing that could tend to make a farther connection betweenthe families undesirable.-- She had seen enough of her pride, hermeanness, and her determined prejudice against herself, to comprehendall the difficulties that must have perplexed the engagement, andretarded the marriage, of Edward and herself, had he been otherwisefree;--and she had seen almost enough to be thankful for her OWN sake,that one greater obstacle preserved her from suffering under any otherof Mrs. Ferrars's creation, preserved her from all dependence upon hercaprice, or any solicitude for her good opinion.  Or at least, if shedid not bring herself quite to rejoice in Edward's being fettered toLucy, she determined, that had Lucy been more amiable, she OUGHT tohave rejoiced.She wondered that Lucy's spirits could be so very much elevated by thecivility of Mrs. Ferrars;--that her interest and her vanity should sovery much blind her as to make the attention which seemed only paid herbecause she was NOT ELINOR, appear a compliment to herself--or to allowher to derive encouragement from a preference only given her, becauseher real situation was unknown.  But that it was so, had not only beendeclared by Lucy's eyes at the time, but was declared over again thenext morning more openly, for at her particular desire, Lady Middletonset her down in Berkeley Street on the chance of seeing Elinor alone,to tell her how happy she was.The chance proved a lucky one, for a message from Mrs. Palmer soonafter she arrived, carried Mrs. Jennings away."My dear friend," cried Lucy, as soon as they were by themselves, "Icome to talk to you of my happiness.  Could anything be so flatteringas Mrs. Ferrars's way of treating me yesterday?  So exceeding affableas she was!--You know how I dreaded the thoughts of seeing her;--butthe very moment I was introduced, there was such an affability in herbehaviour as really should seem to say, she had quite took a fancy tome.  Now was not it so?-- You saw it all; and was not you quite struckwith it?""She was certainly very civil to you.""Civil!--Did you see nothing but only civility?-- I saw a vast dealmore.  Such kindness as fell to the share of nobody but me!--No pride,no hauteur, and your sister just the same--all sweetness andaffability!"Elinor wished to talk of something else, but Lucy still pressed her toown that she had reason for her happiness; and Elinor was obliged to goon.--"Undoubtedly, if they had known your engagement," said she, "nothingcould be more flattering than their treatment of you;--but as that wasnot the case"--"I guessed you would say so,"--replied Lucy quickly--"but there was noreason in the world why Mrs. Ferrars should seem to like me, if she didnot, and her liking me is every thing.  You shan't talk me out of mysatisfaction.  I am sure it will all end well, and there will be nodifficulties at all, to what I used to think.  Mrs. Ferrars is acharming woman, and so is your sister.  They are both delightful women,indeed!--I wonder I should never hear you say how agreeable Mrs.Dashwood was!"To this Elinor had no answer to make, and did not attempt any."Are you ill, Miss Dashwood?--you seem low--you don't speak;--sure youan't well.""I never was in better health.""I am glad of it with all my heart; but really you did not look it.  Ishould be sorry to have YOU ill; you, that have been the greatestcomfort to me in the world!--Heaven knows what I should have donewithout your friendship."--Elinor tried to make a civil answer, though doubting her own success.But it seemed to satisfy Lucy, for she directly replied,"Indeed I am perfectly convinced of your regard for me, and next toEdward's love, it is the greatest comfort I have.--Poor Edward!--Butnow there is one good thing, we shall be able to meet, and meet prettyoften, for Lady Middleton's delighted with Mrs. Dashwood, so we shallbe a good deal in Harley Street, I dare say, and Edward spends half histime with his sister--besides, Lady Middleton and Mrs. Ferrars willvisit now;--and Mrs. Ferrars and your sister were both so good to saymore than once, they should always be glad to see me.-- They are suchcharming women!--I am sure if ever you tell your sister what I think ofher, you cannot speak too high."But Elinor would not give her any encouragement to hope that she SHOULDtell her sister.  Lucy continued."I am sure I should have seen it in a moment, if Mrs. Ferrars had tooka dislike to me.  If she had only made me a formal courtesy, forinstance, without saying a word, and never after had took any notice ofme, and never looked at me in a pleasant way--you know what I mean--ifI had been treated in that forbidding sort of way, I should have gaveit all up in despair.  I could not have stood it.  For where she DOESdislike, I know it is most violent."Elinor was prevented from making any reply to this civil triumph, bythe door's being thrown open, the servant's announcing Mr. Ferrars, andEdward's immediately walking in.It was a very awkward moment; and the countenance of each shewed thatit was so.  They all looked exceedingly foolish; and Edward seemed tohave as great an inclination to walk out of the room again, as toadvance farther into it.  The very circumstance, in its unpleasantestform, which they would each have been most anxious to avoid, had fallenon them.--They were not only all three together, but were togetherwithout the relief of any other person.  The ladies recoveredthemselves first.  It was not Lucy's business to put herself forward,and the appearance of secrecy must still be kept up.  She couldtherefore only LOOK her tenderness, and after slightly addressing him,said no more.But Elinor had more to do; and so anxious was she, for his sake and herown, to do it well, that she forced herself, after a moment'srecollection, to welcome him, with a look and manner that were almosteasy, and almost open; and another struggle, another effort stillimproved them.  She would not allow the presence of Lucy, nor theconsciousness of some injustice towards herself, to deter her fromsaying that she was happy to see him, and that she had very muchregretted being from home, when he called before in Berkeley Street.She would not be frightened from paying him those attentions which, asa friend and almost a relation, were his due, by the observant eyes ofLucy, though she soon perceived them to be narrowly watching her.Her manners gave some re-assurance to Edward, and he had courage enoughto sit down; but his embarrassment still exceeded that of the ladies ina proportion, which the case rendered reasonable, though his sex mightmake it rare; for his heart had not the indifference of Lucy's, norcould his conscience have quite the ease of Elinor's.Lucy, with a demure and settled air, seemed determined to make nocontribution to the comfort of the others, and would not say a word;and almost every thing that WAS said, proceeded from Elinor, who wasobliged to volunteer all the information about her mother's health,their coming to town, &c. which Edward ought to have inquired about,but never did.Her exertions did not stop here; for she soon afterwards felt herselfso heroically disposed as to determine, under pretence of fetchingMarianne, to leave the others by themselves; and she really did it, andTHAT in the handsomest manner, for she loitered away several minutes onthe landing-place, with the most high-minded fortitude, before she wentto her sister.  When that was once done, however, it was time for theraptures of Edward to cease; for Marianne's joy hurried her into thedrawing-room immediately.  Her pleasure in seeing him was like everyother of her feelings, strong in itself, and strongly spoken.  She methim with a hand that would be taken, and a voice that expressed theaffection of a sister."Dear Edward!" she cried, "this is a moment of great happiness!--Thiswould almost make amends for every thing!"Edward tried to return her kindness as it deserved, but before suchwitnesses he dared not say half what he really felt.  Again they allsat down, and for a moment or two all were silent; while Marianne waslooking with the most speaking tenderness, sometimes at Edward andsometimes at Elinor, regretting only that their delight in each othershould be checked by Lucy's unwelcome presence.  Edward was the firstto speak, and it was to notice Marianne's altered looks, and expresshis fear of her not finding London agree with her."Oh, don't think of me!" she replied with spirited earnestness, thoughher eyes were filled with tears as she spoke, "don't think of MYhealth.  Elinor is well, you see.  That must be enough for us both."This remark was not calculated to make Edward or Elinor more easy, norto conciliate the good will of Lucy, who looked up at Marianne with novery benignant expression."Do you like London?" said Edward, willing to say any thing that mightintroduce another subject."Not at all.  I expected much pleasure in it, but I have found none.The sight of you, Edward, is the only comfort it has afforded; andthank Heaven! you are what you always were!"She paused--no one spoke."I think, Elinor," she presently added, "we must employ Edward to takecare of us in our return to Barton.  In a week or two, I suppose, weshall be going; and, I trust, Edward will not be very unwilling toaccept the charge."Poor Edward muttered something, but what it was, nobody knew, not evenhimself.  But Marianne, who saw his agitation, and could easily traceit to whatever cause best pleased herself, was perfectly satisfied, andsoon talked of something else."We spent such a day, Edward, in Harley Street yesterday!  So dull, sowretchedly dull!--But I have much to say to you on that head, whichcannot be said now."And with this admirable discretion did she defer the assurance of herfinding their mutual relatives more disagreeable than ever, and of herbeing particularly disgusted with his mother, till they were more inprivate."But why were you not there, Edward?--Why did you not come?""I was engaged elsewhere.""Engaged!  But what was that, when such friends were to be met?""Perhaps, Miss Marianne," cried Lucy, eager to take some revenge onher, "you think young men never stand upon engagements, if they have nomind to keep them, little as well as great."Elinor was very angry, but Marianne seemed entirely insensible of thesting; for she calmly replied,"Not so, indeed; for, seriously speaking, I am very sure thatconscience only kept Edward from Harley Street.  And I really believehe HAS the most delicate conscience in the world; the most scrupulousin performing every engagement, however minute, and however it may makeagainst his interest or pleasure.  He is the most fearful of givingpain, of wounding expectation, and the most incapable of being selfish,of any body I ever saw.  Edward, it is so, and I will say it.  What!are you never to hear yourself praised!--Then you must be no friend ofmine; for those who will accept of my love and esteem, must submit tomy open commendation."The nature of her commendation, in the present case, however, happenedto be particularly ill-suited to the feelings of two thirds of herauditors, and was so very unexhilarating to Edward, that he very soongot up to go away."Going so soon!" said Marianne; "my dear Edward, this must not be."And drawing him a little aside, she whispered her persuasion that Lucycould not stay much longer.  But even this encouragement failed, for hewould go; and Lucy, who would have outstaid him, had his visit lastedtwo hours, soon afterwards went away."What can bring her here so often?" said Marianne, on her leaving them."Could not she see that we wanted her gone!--how teazing to Edward!""Why so?--we were all his friends, and Lucy has been the longest knownto him of any.  It is but natural that he should like to see her aswell as ourselves."Marianne looked at her steadily, and said, "You know, Elinor, that thisis a kind of talking which I cannot bear.  If you only hope to haveyour assertion contradicted, as I must suppose to be the case, youought to recollect that I am the last person in the world to do it.  Icannot descend to be tricked out of assurances, that are not reallywanted."She then left the room; and Elinor dared not follow her to say more,for bound as she was by her promise of secrecy to Lucy, she could giveno information that would convince Marianne; and painful as theconsequences of her still continuing in an error might be, she wasobliged to submit to it.  All that she could hope, was that Edwardwould not often expose her or himself to the distress of hearingMarianne's mistaken warmth, nor to the repetition of any other part ofthe pain that had attended their recent meeting--and this she had everyreason to expect.Within a few days after this meeting, the newspapers announced to theworld, that the lady of Thomas Palmer, Esq. was safely delivered of ason and heir; a very interesting and satisfactory paragraph, at leastto all those intimate connections who knew it before.This event, highly important to Mrs. Jennings's happiness, produced atemporary alteration in the disposal of her time, and influenced, in alike degree, the engagements of her young friends; for as she wished tobe as much as possible with Charlotte, she went thither every morning assoon as she was dressed, and did not return till late in the evening;and the Miss Dashwoods, at the particular request of the Middletons,spent the whole of every day in Conduit Street. For their own comfortthey would much rather have remained, at least all the morning, in Mrs.Jennings's house; but it was not a thing to be urged against the wishesof everybody. Their hours were therefore made over to Lady Middleton andthe two Miss Steeles, by whom their company, in fact was as littlevalued, as it was professedly sought.They had too much sense to be desirable companions to the former; andby the latter they were considered with a jealous eye, as intruding onTHEIR ground, and sharing the kindness which they wanted to monopolize.Though nothing could be more polite than Lady Middleton's behaviour toElinor and Marianne, she did not really like them at all.  Because theyneither flattered herself nor her children, she could not believe themgood-natured; and because they were fond of reading, she fancied themsatirical: perhaps without exactly knowing what it was to be satirical;but THAT did not signify.  It was censure in common use, and easilygiven.Their presence was a restraint both on her and on Lucy.  It checked theidleness of one, and the business of the other.  Lady Middleton wasashamed of doing nothing before them, and the flattery which Lucy wasproud to think of and administer at other times, she feared they woulddespise her for offering.  Miss Steele was the least discomposed of thethree, by their presence; and it was in their power to reconcile her toit entirely.  Would either of them only have given her a full andminute account of the whole affair between Marianne and Mr. Willoughby,she would have thought herself amply rewarded for the sacrifice of thebest place by the fire after dinner, which their arrival occasioned.But this conciliation was not granted; for though she often threw outexpressions of pity for her sister to Elinor, and more than once dropta reflection on the inconstancy of beaux before Marianne, no effect wasproduced, but a look of indifference from the former, or of disgust inthe latter.  An effort even yet lighter might have made her theirfriend.  Would they only have laughed at her about the Doctor!  But solittle were they, anymore than the others, inclined to oblige her, thatif Sir John dined from home, she might spend a whole day withouthearing any other raillery on the subject, than what she was kindenough to bestow on herself.All these jealousies and discontents, however, were so totallyunsuspected by Mrs. Jennings, that she thought it a delightful thingfor the girls to be together; and generally congratulated her youngfriends every night, on having escaped the company of a stupid oldwoman so long.  She joined them sometimes at Sir John's, sometimes ather own house; but wherever it was, she always came in excellentspirits, full of delight and importance, attributing Charlotte's welldoing to her own care, and ready to give so exact, so minute a detailof her situation, as only Miss Steele had curiosity enough to desire.One thing DID disturb her; and of that she made her daily complaint.Mr. Palmer maintained the common, but unfatherly opinion among his sex,of all infants being alike; and though she could plainly perceive, atdifferent times, the most striking resemblance between this baby andevery one of his relations on both sides, there was no convincing hisfather of it; no persuading him to believe that it was not exactly likeevery other baby of the same age; nor could he even be brought toacknowledge the simple proposition of its being the finest child in theworld.I come now to the relation of a misfortune, which about this timebefell Mrs. John Dashwood.  It so happened that while her two sisterswith Mrs. Jennings were first calling on her in Harley Street, anotherof her acquaintance had dropt in--a circumstance in itself notapparently likely to produce evil to her.  But while the imaginationsof other people will carry them away to form wrong judgments of ourconduct, and to decide on it by slight appearances, one's happinessmust in some measure be always at the mercy of chance.  In the presentinstance, this last-arrived lady allowed her fancy to so far outruntruth and probability, that on merely hearing the name of the MissDashwoods, and understanding them to be Mr. Dashwood's sisters, sheimmediately concluded them to be staying in Harley Street; and thismisconstruction produced within a day or two afterwards, cards ofinvitation for them as well as for their brother and sister, to a smallmusical party at her house.  The consequence of which was, that Mrs.John Dashwood was obliged to submit not only to the exceedingly greatinconvenience of sending her carriage for the Miss Dashwoods, but, whatwas still worse, must be subject to all the unpleasantness of appearingto treat them with attention: and who could tell that they might notexpect to go out with her a second time?  The power of disappointingthem, it was true, must always be hers.  But that was not enough; forwhen people are determined on a mode of conduct which they know to bewrong, they feel injured by the expectation of any thing better fromthem.Marianne had now been brought by degrees, so much into the habit ofgoing out every day, that it was become a matter of indifference toher, whether she went or not: and she prepared quietly and mechanicallyfor every evening's engagement, though without expecting the smallestamusement from any, and very often without knowing, till the lastmoment, where it was to take her.To her dress and appearance she was grown so perfectly indifferent, asnot to bestow half the consideration on it, during the whole of hertoilet, which it received from Miss Steele in the first five minutes oftheir being together, when it was finished.  Nothing escaped HER minuteobservation and general curiosity; she saw every thing, and asked everything; was never easy till she knew the price of every part ofMarianne's dress; could have guessed the number of her gowns altogetherwith better judgment than Marianne herself, and was not without hopesof finding out before they parted, how much her washing cost per week,and how much she had every year to spend upon herself.  Theimpertinence of these kind of scrutinies, moreover, was generallyconcluded with a compliment, which though meant as its douceur, wasconsidered by Marianne as the greatest impertinence of all; for afterundergoing an examination into the value and make of her gown, thecolour of her shoes, and the arrangement of her hair, she was almostsure of being told that upon "her word she looked vastly smart, and shedared to say she would make a great many conquests."With such encouragement as this, was she dismissed on the presentoccasion, to her brother's carriage; which they were ready to enterfive minutes after it stopped at the door, a punctuality not veryagreeable to their sister-in-law, who had preceded them to the house ofher acquaintance, and was there hoping for some delay on their partthat might inconvenience either herself or her coachman.The events of this evening were not very remarkable.  The party, likeother musical parties, comprehended a great many people who had realtaste for the performance, and a great many more who had none at all;and the performers themselves were, as usual, in their own estimation,and that of their immediate friends, the first private performers inEngland.As Elinor was neither musical, nor affecting to be so, she made noscruple of turning her eyes from the grand pianoforte, whenever itsuited her, and unrestrained even by the presence of a harp, andvioloncello, would fix them at pleasure on any other object in theroom.  In one of these excursive glances she perceived among a group ofyoung men, the very he, who had given them a lecture on toothpick-casesat Gray's.  She perceived him soon afterwards looking at herself, andspeaking familiarly to her brother; and had just determined to find outhis name from the latter, when they both came towards her, and Mr.Dashwood introduced him to her as Mr. Robert Ferrars.He addressed her with easy civility, and twisted his head into a bowwhich assured her as plainly as words could have done, that he wasexactly the coxcomb she had heard him described to be by Lucy.  Happyhad it been for her, if her regard for Edward had depended less on hisown merit, than on the merit of his nearest relations!  For then hisbrother's bow must have given the finishing stroke to what theill-humour of his mother and sister would have begun.  But while shewondered at the difference of the two young men, she did not find thatthe emptiness of conceit of the one, put her out of all charity withthe modesty and worth of the other.  Why they WERE different, Robertexclaimed to her himself in the course of a quarter of an hour'sconversation; for, talking of his brother, and lamenting the extremeGAUCHERIE which he really believed kept him from mixing in propersociety, he candidly and generously attributed it much less to anynatural deficiency, than to the misfortune of a private education;while he himself, though probably without any particular, any materialsuperiority by nature, merely from the advantage of a public school,was as well fitted to mix in the world as any other man."Upon my soul," he added, "I believe it is nothing more; and so I oftentell my mother, when she is grieving about it.  'My dear Madam,' Ialways say to her, 'you must make yourself easy.  The evil is nowirremediable, and it has been entirely your own doing.  Why would yoube persuaded by my uncle, Sir Robert, against your own judgment, toplace Edward under private tuition, at the most critical time of hislife?  If you had only sent him to Westminster as well as myself,instead of sending him to Mr. Pratt's, all this would have beenprevented.' This is the way in which I always consider the matter, andmy mother is perfectly convinced of her error."Elinor would not oppose his opinion, because, whatever might be hergeneral estimation of the advantage of a public school, she could notthink of Edward's abode in Mr. Pratt's family, with any satisfaction."You reside in Devonshire, I think,"--was his next observation, "in acottage near Dawlish."Elinor set him right as to its situation; and it seemed rathersurprising to him that anybody could live in Devonshire, without livingnear Dawlish.  He bestowed his hearty approbation however on theirspecies of house."For my own part," said he, "I am excessively fond of a cottage; thereis always so much comfort, so much elegance about them.  And I protest,if I had any money to spare, I should buy a little land and build onemyself, within a short distance of London, where I might drive myselfdown at any time, and collect a few friends about me, and be happy.  Iadvise every body who is going to build, to build a cottage.  My friendLord Courtland came to me the other day on purpose to ask my advice,and laid before me three different plans of Bonomi's.  I was to decideon the best of them.  'My dear Courtland,' said I, immediately throwingthem all into the fire, 'do not adopt either of them, but by all meansbuild a cottage.' And that I fancy, will be the end of it."Some people imagine that there can be no accommodations, no space in acottage; but this is all a mistake.  I was last month at my friendElliott's, near Dartford.  Lady Elliott wished to give a dance.  'Buthow can it be done?' said she; 'my dear Ferrars, do tell me how it isto be managed.  There is not a room in this cottage that will hold tencouple, and where can the supper be?' I immediately saw that therecould be no difficulty in it, so I said, 'My dear Lady Elliott, do notbe uneasy.  The dining parlour will admit eighteen couple with ease;card-tables may be placed in the drawing-room; the library may be openfor tea and other refreshments; and let the supper be set out in thesaloon.'  Lady Elliott was delighted with the thought.  We measured thedining-room, and found it would hold exactly eighteen couple, and theaffair was arranged precisely after my plan.  So that, in fact, yousee, if people do but know how to set about it, every comfort may be aswell enjoyed in a cottage as in the most spacious dwelling."Elinor agreed to it all, for she did not think he deserved thecompliment of rational opposition.As John Dashwood had no more pleasure in music than his eldest sister,his mind was equally at liberty to fix on any thing else; and a thoughtstruck him during the evening, which he communicated to his wife, forher approbation, when they got home.  The consideration of Mrs.Dennison's mistake, in supposing his sisters their guests, hadsuggested the propriety of their being really invited to become such,while Mrs. Jennings's engagements kept her from home.  The expense wouldbe nothing, the inconvenience not more; and it was altogether anattention which the delicacy of his conscience pointed out to berequisite to its complete enfranchisement from his promise to hisfather.  Fanny was startled at the proposal."I do not see how it can be done," said she, "without affronting LadyMiddleton, for they spend every day with her; otherwise I should beexceedingly glad to do it.  You know I am always ready to pay them anyattention in my power, as my taking them out this evening shews.  Butthey are Lady Middleton's visitors.  How can I ask them away from her?"Her husband, but with great humility, did not see the force of herobjection.  "They had already spent a week in this manner in ConduitStreet, and Lady Middleton could not be displeased at their giving thesame number of days to such near relations."Fanny paused a moment, and then, with fresh vigor, said,"My love I would ask them with all my heart, if it was in my power.But I had just settled within myself to ask the Miss Steeles to spend afew days with us.  They are very well behaved, good kind of girls; andI think the attention is due to them, as their uncle did so very wellby Edward.  We can ask your sisters some other year, you know; but theMiss Steeles may not be in town any more.  I am sure you will likethem; indeed, you DO like them, you know, very much already, and sodoes my mother; and they are such favourites with Harry!"Mr. Dashwood was convinced.  He saw the necessity of inviting the MissSteeles immediately, and his conscience was pacified by the resolutionof inviting his sisters another year; at the same time, however, slylysuspecting that another year would make the invitation needless, bybringing Elinor to town as Colonel Brandon's wife, and Marianne asTHEIR visitor.Fanny, rejoicing in her escape, and proud of the ready wit that hadprocured it, wrote the next morning to Lucy, to request her company andher sister's, for some days, in Harley Street, as soon as LadyMiddleton could spare them.  This was enough to make Lucy really andreasonably happy.  Mrs. Dashwood seemed actually working for her,herself; cherishing all her hopes, and promoting all her views!  Suchan opportunity of being with Edward and his family was, above allthings, the most material to her interest, and such an invitation themost gratifying to her feelings!  It was an advantage that could not betoo gratefully acknowledged, nor too speedily made use of; and thevisit to Lady Middleton, which had not before had any precise limits,was instantly discovered to have been always meant to end in two days'time.When the note was shown to Elinor, as it was within ten minutes afterits arrival, it gave her, for the first time, some share in theexpectations of Lucy; for such a mark of uncommon kindness, vouchsafedon so short an acquaintance, seemed to declare that the good-willtowards her arose from something more than merely malice againstherself; and might be brought, by time and address, to do every thingthat Lucy wished.  Her flattery had already subdued the pride of LadyMiddleton, and made an entry into the close heart of Mrs. JohnDashwood; and these were effects that laid open the probability ofgreater.The Miss Steeles removed to Harley Street, and all that reached Elinorof their influence there, strengthened her expectation of the event.Sir John, who called on them more than once, brought home such accountsof the favour they were in, as must be universally striking.  Mrs.Dashwood had never been so much pleased with any young women in herlife, as she was with them; had given each of them a needle book madeby some emigrant; called Lucy by her Christian name; and did not knowwhether she should ever be able to part with them.[At this point in the first and second editions, Volume II ended.]Mrs. Palmer was so well at the end of a fortnight, that her mother feltit no longer necessary to give up the whole of her time to her; and,contenting herself with visiting her once or twice a day, returned fromthat period to her own home, and her own habits, in which she found theMiss Dashwoods very ready to resume their former share.About the third or fourth morning after their being thus resettled inBerkeley Street, Mrs. Jennings, on returning from her ordinary visit toMrs. Palmer, entered the drawing-room, where Elinor was sitting byherself, with an air of such hurrying importance as prepared her tohear something wonderful; and giving her time only to form that idea,began directly to justify it, by saying,"Lord! my dear Miss Dashwood! have you heard the news?""No, ma'am.  What is it?""Something so strange!  But you shall hear it all.-- When I got to Mr.Palmer's, I found Charlotte quite in a fuss about the child.  She wassure it was very ill--it cried, and fretted, and was all over pimples.So I looked at it directly, and, 'Lord! my dear,' says I, 'it isnothing in the world, but the red gum--' and nurse said just the same.But Charlotte, she would not be satisfied, so Mr. Donavan was sent for;and luckily he happened to just come in from Harley Street, so hestepped over directly, and as soon as ever Mama, he saidjust as we did, that it was nothing in the world but the red gum, andthen Charlotte was easy.  And so, just as he was going away again, itcame into my head, I am sure I do not know how I happened to think ofit, but it came into my head to ask him if there was any news.  So uponthat, he smirked, and simpered, and looked grave, and seemed to knowsomething or other, and at last he said in a whisper, 'For fear anyunpleasant report should reach the young ladies under your care as totheir sister's indisposition, I think it advisable to say, that Ibelieve there is no great reason for alarm; I hope Mrs. Dashwood willdo very well.'""What! is Fanny ill?""That is exactly what I said, my dear.  'Lord!' says I, 'is Mrs.Dashwood ill?' So then it all came out; and the long and the short ofthe matter, by all I can learn, seems to be this.  Mr. Edward Ferrars,the very young man I used to joke with you about (but however, as itturns out, I am monstrous glad there was never any thing in it), Mr.Edward Ferrars, it seems, has been engaged above this twelvemonth to mycousin Lucy!--There's for you, my dear!--And not a creature knowing asyllable of the matter, except Nancy!--Could you have believed such athing possible?-- There is no great wonder in their liking one another;but that matters should be brought so forward between them, and nobodysuspect it!--THAT is strange!--I never happened to see them together,or I am sure I should have found it out directly.  Well, and so thiswas kept a great secret, for fear of Mrs. Ferrars, and neither she noryour brother or sister suspected a word of the matter;--till this verymorning, poor Nancy, who, you know, is a well-meaning creature, but noconjurer, popt it all out.  'Lord!' thinks she to herself, 'they areall so fond of Lucy, to be sure they will make no difficulty about it;'and so, away she went to your sister, who was sitting all alone at hercarpet-work, little suspecting what was to come--for she had just beensaying to your brother, only five minutes before, that she thought tomake a match between Edward and some Lord's daughter or other, I forgetwho.  So you may think what a blow it was to all her vanity and pride.She fell into violent hysterics immediately, with such screams asreached your brother's ears, as he was sitting in his own dressing-roomdown stairs, thinking about writing a letter to his steward in thecountry.  So up he flew directly, and a terrible scene took place, forLucy was come to them by that time, little dreaming what was going on.Poor soul!  I pity HER.  And I must say, I think she was used veryhardly; for your sister scolded like any fury, and soon drove her intoa fainting fit.  Nancy, she fell upon her knees, and cried bitterly;and your brother, he walked about the room, and said he did not knowwhat to do.  Mrs. Dashwood declared they should not stay a minutelonger in the house, and your brother was forced to go down upon HISknees too, to persuade her to let them stay till they had packed uptheir clothes.  THEN she fell into hysterics again, and he was sofrightened that he would send for Mr. Donavan, and Mr. Donavan foundthe house in all this uproar.  The carriage was at the door ready totake my poor cousins away, and they were just stepping in as he cameoff; poor Lucy in such a condition, he says, she could hardly walk; andNancy, she was almost as bad.  I declare, I have no patience with yoursister; and I hope, with all my heart, it will be a match in spite ofher.  Lord! what a taking poor Mr. Edward will be in when he hears ofit!  To have his love used so scornfully! for they say he is monstrousfond of her, as well he may.  I should not wonder, if he was to be inthe greatest passion!--and Mr. Donavan thinks just the same.  He and Ihad a great deal of talk about it; and the best of all is, that he isgone back again to Harley Street, that he may be within call when Mrs.Ferrars is told of it, for she was sent for as soon as ever my cousinsleft the house, for your sister was sure SHE would be in hysterics too;and so she may, for what I care.  I have no pity for either of them.  Ihave no notion of people's making such a to-do about money andgreatness.  There is no reason on earth why Mr. Edward and Lucy shouldnot marry; for I am sure Mrs. Ferrars may afford to do very well by herson, and though Lucy has next to nothing herself, she knows better thanany body how to make the most of every thing; I dare say, if Mrs.Ferrars would only allow him five hundred a-year, she would make asgood an appearance with it as any body else would with eight.  Lord!how snug they might live in such another cottage as yours--or a littlebigger--with two maids, and two men; and I believe I could help them toa housemaid, for my Betty has a sister out of place, that would fitthem exactly."Here Mrs. Jennings ceased, and as Elinor had had time enough to collecther thoughts, she was able to give such an answer, and make suchobservations, as the subject might naturally be supposed to produce.Happy to find that she was not suspected of any extraordinary interestin it; that Mrs. Jennings (as she had of late often hoped might be thecase) had ceased to imagine her at all attached to Edward; and happyabove all the rest, in the absence of Marianne, she felt very well ableto speak of the affair without embarrassment, and to give her judgment,as she believed, with impartiality on the conduct of every oneconcerned in it.She could hardly determine what her own expectation of its event reallywas; though she earnestly tried to drive away the notion of its beingpossible to end otherwise at last, than in the marriage of Edward andLucy.  What Mrs. Ferrars would say and do, though there could not be adoubt of its nature, she was anxious to hear; and still more anxious toknow how Edward would conduct himself.  For HIM she felt muchcompassion;--for Lucy very little--and it cost her some pains toprocure that little;--for the rest of the party none at all.As Mrs. Jennings could talk on no other subject, Elinor soon saw thenecessity of preparing Marianne for its discussion.  No time was to belost in undeceiving her, in making her acquainted with the real truth,and in endeavouring to bring her to hear it talked of by others,without betraying that she felt any uneasiness for her sister, or anyresentment against Edward.Elinor's office was a painful one.--She was going to remove what shereally believed to be her sister's chief consolation,--to give suchparticulars of Edward as she feared would ruin him for ever in her goodopinion,-and to make Marianne, by a resemblance in their situations,which to HER fancy would seem strong, feel all her own disappointmentover again.  But unwelcome as such a task must be, it was necessary tobe done, and Elinor therefore hastened to perform it.She was very far from wishing to dwell on her own feelings, or torepresent herself as suffering much, any otherwise than as theself-command she had practised since her first knowledge of Edward'sengagement, might suggest a hint of what was practicable to Marianne.Her narration was clear and simple; and though it could not be givenwithout emotion, it was not accompanied by violent agitation, norimpetuous grief.--THAT belonged rather to the hearer, for Mariannelistened with horror, and cried excessively.  Elinor was to be thecomforter of others in her own distresses, no less than in theirs; andall the comfort that could be given by assurances of her own composureof mind, and a very earnest vindication of Edward from every charge butof imprudence, was readily offered.But Marianne for some time would give credit to neither.  Edward seemeda second Willoughby; and acknowledging as Elinor did, that she HADloved him most sincerely, could she feel less than herself!  As forLucy Steele, she considered her so totally unamiable, so absolutelyincapable of attaching a sensible man, that she could not be persuadedat first to believe, and afterwards to pardon, any former affection ofEdward for her.  She would not even admit it to have been natural; andElinor left her to be convinced that it was so, by that which onlycould convince her, a better knowledge of mankind.Her first communication had reached no farther than to state the factof the engagement, and the length of time it had existed.--Marianne'sfeelings had then broken in, and put an end to all regularity ofdetail; and for some time all that could be done was to soothe herdistress, lessen her alarms, and combat her resentment.  The firstquestion on her side, which led to farther particulars, was,--"How long has this been known to you, Elinor? has he written to you?""I have known it these four months.  When Lucy first came to BartonPark last November, she told me in confidence of her engagement."At these words, Marianne's eyes expressed the astonishment which herlips could not utter.  After a pause of wonder, she exclaimed--"Four months!--Have you known of this four months?"Elinor confirmed it."What!--while attending me in all my misery, has this been on yourheart?--And I have reproached you for being happy!"--"It was not fit that you should then know how much I was the reverse!""Four months!"--cried Marianne again.--"So calm!--so cheerful!--howhave you been supported?"--"By feeling that I was doing my duty.--My promise to Lucy, obliged meto be secret.  I owed it to her, therefore, to avoid giving any hint ofthe truth; and I owed it to my family and friends, not to create inthem a solicitude about me, which it could not be in my power tosatisfy."Marianne seemed much struck."I have very often wished to undeceive yourself and my mother," addedElinor; "and once or twice I have attempted it;--but without betrayingmy trust, I never could have convinced you.""Four months!--and yet you loved him!"--"Yes. But I did not love only him;--and while the comfort of others wasdear to me, I was glad to spare them from knowing how much I felt.Now, I can think and speak of it with little emotion.  I would not haveyou suffer on my account; for I assure you I no longer suffermaterially myself.  I have many things to support me.  I am notconscious of having provoked the disappointment by any imprudence of myown, I have borne it as much as possible without spreading it farther.I acquit Edward of essential misconduct.  I wish him very happy; and Iam so sure of his always doing his duty, that though now he may harboursome regret, in the end he must become so.  Lucy does not want sense,and that is the foundation on which every thing good may be built.--Andafter all, Marianne, after all that is bewitching in the idea of asingle and constant attachment, and all that can be said of one'shappiness depending entirely on any particular person, it is notmeant--it is not fit--it is not possible that it should be so.-- Edwardwill marry Lucy; he will marry a woman superior in person andunderstanding to half her sex; and time and habit will teach him toforget that he ever thought another superior to HER."--"If such is your way of thinking," said Marianne, "if the loss of whatis most valued is so easily to be made up by something else, yourresolution, your self-command, are, perhaps, a little less to bewondered at.--They are brought more within my comprehension.""I understand you.--You do not suppose that I have ever felt much.--Forfour months, Marianne, I have had all this hanging on my mind, withoutbeing at liberty to speak of it to a single creature; knowing that itwould make you and my mother most unhappy whenever it were explained toyou, yet unable to prepare you for it in the least.-- It was toldme,--it was in a manner forced on me by the very person herself, whoseprior engagement ruined all my prospects; and told me, as I thought,with triumph.-- This person's suspicions, therefore, I have had tooppose, by endeavouring to appear indifferent where I have been mostdeeply interested;--and it has not been only once;--I have had herhopes and exultation to listen to again and again.-- I have knownmyself to be divided from Edward for ever, without hearing onecircumstance that could make me less desire the connection.--Nothinghas proved him unworthy; nor has anything declared him indifferent tome.-- I have had to contend against the unkindness of his sister, andthe insolence of his mother; and have suffered the punishment of anattachment, without enjoying its advantages.-- And all this has beengoing on at a time, when, as you know too well, it has not been my onlyunhappiness.-- If you can think me capable of ever feeling--surely youmay suppose that I have suffered NOW.  The composure of mind with whichI have brought myself at present to consider the matter, theconsolation that I have been willing to admit, have been the effect ofconstant and painful exertion;--they did not spring up ofthemselves;--they did not occur to relieve my spirits at first.-- No,Marianne.--THEN, if I had not been bound to silence, perhaps nothingcould have kept me entirely--not even what I owed to my dearestfriends--from openly shewing that I was VERY unhappy."--Marianne was quite subdued.--"Oh! Elinor," she cried, "you have made me hate myself for ever.--Howbarbarous have I been to you!--you, who have been my only comfort, whohave borne with me in all my misery, who have seemed to be onlysuffering for me!--Is this my gratitude?--Is this the only return I canmake you?--Because your merit cries out upon myself, I have been tryingto do it away."The tenderest caresses followed this confession.  In such a frame ofmind as she was now in, Elinor had no difficulty in obtaining from herwhatever promise she required; and at her request, Marianne engagednever to speak of the affair to any one with the least appearance ofbitterness;--to meet Lucy without betraying the smallest increase ofdislike to her;--and even to see Edward himself, if chance should bringthem together, without any diminution of her usual cordiality.-- Thesewere great concessions;--but where Marianne felt that she had injured,no reparation could be too much for her to make.She performed her promise of being discreet, to admiration.--Sheattended to all that Mrs. Jennings had to say upon the subject, with anunchanging complexion, dissented from her in nothing, and was heardthree times to say, "Yes, ma'am."--She listened to her praise of Lucywith only moving from one chair to another, and when Mrs. Jenningstalked of Edward's affection, it cost her only a spasm in herthroat.--Such advances towards heroism in her sister, made Elinor feelequal to any thing herself.The next morning brought a farther trial of it, in a visit from theirbrother, who came with a most serious aspect to talk over the dreadfulaffair, and bring them news of his wife."You have heard, I suppose," said he with great solemnity, as soon ashe was seated, "of the very shocking discovery that took place underour roof yesterday."They all looked their assent; it seemed too awful a moment for speech."Your sister," he continued, "has suffered dreadfully.  Mrs. Ferrarstoo--in short it has been a scene of such complicated distress--but Iwill hope that the storm may be weathered without our being any of usquite overcome.  Poor Fanny! she was in hysterics all yesterday.  But Iwould not alarm you too much.  Donavan says there is nothing materiallyto be apprehended; her constitution is a good one, and her resolutionequal to any thing.  She has borne it all, with the fortitude of anangel!  She says she never shall think well of anybody again; and onecannot wonder at it, after being so deceived!--meeting with suchingratitude, where so much kindness had been shewn, so much confidencehad been placed!  It was quite out of the benevolence of her heart,that she had asked these young women to her house; merely because shethought they deserved some attention, were harmless, well-behavedgirls, and would be pleasant companions; for otherwise we both wishedvery much to have invited you and Marianne to be with us, while yourkind friend there, was attending her daughter.  And now to be sorewarded!  'I wish, with all my heart,' says poor Fanny in heraffectionate way, 'that we had asked your sisters instead of them.'"Here he stopped to be thanked; which being done, he went on."What poor Mrs. Ferrars suffered, when first Fanny broke it to her, isnot to be described.  While she with the truest affection had beenplanning a most eligible connection for him, was it to be supposed thathe could be all the time secretly engaged to another person!--such asuspicion could never have entered her head!  If she suspected ANYprepossession elsewhere, it could not be in THAT quarter.  'THERE, tobe sure,' said she, 'I might have thought myself safe.' She was quitein an agony.  We consulted together, however, as to what should bedone, and at last she determined to send for Edward.  He came.  But Iam sorry to relate what ensued.  All that Mrs. Ferrars could say tomake him put an end to the engagement, assisted too as you may wellsuppose by my arguments, and Fanny's entreaties, was of no avail.Duty, affection, every thing was disregarded.  I never thought Edwardso stubborn, so unfeeling before.  His mother explained to him herliberal designs, in case of his marrying Miss Morton; told him shewould settle on him the Norfolk estate, which, clear of land-tax,brings in a good thousand a-year; offered even, when matters grewdesperate, to make it twelve hundred; and in opposition to this, if hestill persisted in this low connection, represented to him the certainpenury that must attend the match.  His own two thousand pounds sheprotested should be his all; she would never see him again; and so farwould she be from affording him the smallest assistance, that if hewere to enter into any profession with a view of better support, shewould do all in her power to prevent him advancing in it."Here Marianne, in an ecstasy of indignation, clapped her handstogether, and cried, "Gracious God!  can this be possible!""Well may you wonder, Marianne," replied her brother, "at the obstinacywhich could resist such arguments as these.  Your exclamation is verynatural."Marianne was going to retort, but she remembered her promises, andforbore."All this, however," he continued, "was urged in vain.  Edward saidvery little; but what he did say, was in the most determined manner.Nothing should prevail on him to give up his engagement.  He wouldstand to it, cost him what it might.""Then," cried Mrs. Jennings with blunt sincerity, no longer able to besilent, "he has acted like an honest man! I beg your pardon, Mr.Dashwood, but if he had done otherwise, I should have thought him arascal.  I have some little concern in the business, as well asyourself, for Lucy Steele is my cousin, and I believe there is not abetter kind of girl in the world, nor one who more deserves a goodhusband."John Dashwood was greatly astonished; but his nature was calm, not opento provocation, and he never wished to offend anybody, especiallyanybody of good fortune.  He therefore replied, without any resentment,"I would by no means speak disrespectfully of any relation of yours,madam.  Miss Lucy Steele is, I dare say, a very deserving young woman,but in the present case you know, the connection must be impossible.And to have entered into a secret engagement with a young man under heruncle's care, the son of a woman especially of such very large fortuneas Mrs. Ferrars, is perhaps, altogether a little extraordinary. Inshort, I do not mean to reflect upon the behaviour of any person whomyou have a regard for, Mrs. Jennings.  We all wish her extremely happy;and Mrs. Ferrars's conduct throughout the whole, has been such as everyconscientious, good mother, in like circumstances, would adopt.  It hasbeen dignified and liberal.  Edward has drawn his own lot, and I fearit will be a bad one."Marianne sighed out her similar apprehension; and Elinor's heart wrungfor the feelings of Edward, while braving his mother's threats, for awoman who could not reward him."Well, sir," said Mrs. Jennings, "and how did it end?""I am sorry to say, ma'am, in a most unhappy rupture:-- Edward isdismissed for ever from his mother's notice.  He left her houseyesterday, but where he is gone, or whether he is still in town, I donot know; for WE of course can make no inquiry.""Poor young man!--and what is to become of him?""What, indeed, ma'am!  It is a melancholy consideration.  Born to theprospect of such affluence!  I cannot conceive a situation moredeplorable.  The interest of two thousand pounds--how can a man live onit?--and when to that is added the recollection, that he might, but forhis own folly, within three months have been in the receipt of twothousand, five hundred a-year (for Miss Morton has thirty thousandpounds,) I cannot picture to myself a more wretched condition.  We mustall feel for him; and the more so, because it is totally out of ourpower to assist him.""Poor young man!" cried Mrs. Jennings, "I am sure he should be verywelcome to bed and board at my house; and so I would tell him if Icould see him.  It is not fit that he should be living about at his owncharge now, at lodgings and taverns."Elinor's heart thanked her for such kindness towards Edward, though shecould not forbear smiling at the form of it."If he would only have done as well by himself," said John Dashwood,"as all his friends were disposed to do by him, he might now have beenin his proper situation, and would have wanted for nothing.  But as itis, it must be out of anybody's power to assist him.  And there is onething more preparing against him, which must be worse than all--hismother has determined, with a very natural kind of spirit, to settleTHAT estate upon Robert immediately, which might have been Edward's, onproper conditions.  I left her this morning with her lawyer, talkingover the business.""Well!" said Mrs. Jennings, "that is HER revenge.  Everybody has a wayof their own.  But I don't think mine would be, to make one sonindependent, because another had plagued me."Marianne got up and walked about the room."Can anything be more galling to the spirit of a man," continued John,"than to see his younger brother in possession of an estate which mighthave been his own?  Poor Edward!  I feel for him sincerely."A few minutes more spent in the same kind of effusion, concluded hisvisit; and with repeated assurances to his sisters that he reallybelieved there was no material danger in Fanny's indisposition, andthat they need not therefore be very uneasy about it, he went away;leaving the three ladies unanimous in their sentiments on the presentoccasion, as far at least as it regarded Mrs. Ferrars's conduct, theDashwoods', and Edward's.Marianne's indignation burst forth as soon as he quitted the room; andas her vehemence made reserve impossible in Elinor, and unnecessary inMrs. Jennings, they all joined in a very spirited critique upon theparty.Mrs. Jennings was very warm in her praise of Edward's conduct, but onlyElinor and Marianne understood its true merit.  THEY only knew howlittle he had had to tempt him to be disobedient, and how small was theconsolation, beyond the consciousness of doing right, that could remainto him in the loss of friends and fortune.  Elinor gloried in hisintegrity; and Marianne forgave all his offences in compassion for hispunishment.  But though confidence between them was, by this publicdiscovery, restored to its proper state, it was not a subject on whicheither of them were fond of dwelling when alone.  Elinor avoided itupon principle, as tending to fix still more upon her thoughts, by thetoo warm, too positive assurances of Marianne, that belief of Edward'scontinued affection for herself which she rather wished to do away; andMarianne's courage soon failed her, in trying to converse upon a topicwhich always left her more dissatisfied with herself than ever, by thecomparison it necessarily produced between Elinor's conduct and her own.She felt all the force of that comparison; but not as her sister hadhoped, to urge her to exertion now; she felt it with all the pain ofcontinual self-reproach, regretted most bitterly that she had neverexerted herself before; but it brought only the torture of penitence,without the hope of amendment.  Her mind was so much weakened that shestill fancied present exertion impossible, and therefore it onlydispirited her more.Nothing new was heard by them, for a day or two afterwards, of affairsin Harley Street, or Bartlett's Buildings.  But though so much of thematter was known to them already, that Mrs. Jennings might have hadenough to do in spreading that knowledge farther, without seeking aftermore, she had resolved from the first to pay a visit of comfort andinquiry to her cousins as soon as she could; and nothing but thehindrance of more visitors than usual, had prevented her going to themwithin that time.The third day succeeding their knowledge of the particulars, was sofine, so beautiful a Sunday as to draw many to Kensington Gardens,though it was only the second week in March.  Mrs. Jennings and Elinorwere of the number; but Marianne, who knew that the Willoughbys wereagain in town, and had a constant dread of meeting them, chose ratherto stay at home, than venture into so public a place.An intimate acquaintance of Mrs. Jennings joined them soon after theyentered the Gardens, and Elinor was not sorry that by her continuingwith them, and engaging all Mrs. Jennings's conversation, she washerself left to quiet reflection.  She saw nothing of the Willoughbys,nothing of Edward, and for some time nothing of anybody who could byany chance whether grave or gay, be interesting to her.  But at lastshe found herself with some surprise, accosted by Miss Steele, who,though looking rather shy, expressed great satisfaction in meetingthem, and on receiving encouragement from the particular kindness ofMrs. Jennings, left her own party for a short time, to join their's.Mrs. Jennings immediately whispered to Elinor,"Get it all out of her, my dear.  She will tell you any thing if youask.  You see I cannot leave Mrs. Clarke."It was lucky, however, for Mrs. Jennings's curiosity and Elinor's too,that she would tell any thing WITHOUT being asked; for nothing wouldotherwise have been learnt."I am so glad to meet you;" said Miss Steele, taking her familiarly bythe arm--"for I wanted to see you of all things in the world."  Andthen lowering her voice, "I suppose Mrs. Jennings has heard all aboutit.  Is she angry?""Not at all, I believe, with you.""That is a good thing.  And Lady Middleton, is SHE angry?""I cannot suppose it possible that she should be.""I am monstrous glad of it.  Good gracious!  I have had such a time ofit!  I never saw Lucy in such a rage in my life.  She vowed at firstshe would never trim me up a new bonnet, nor do any thing else for meagain, so long as she lived; but now she is quite come to, and we areas good friends as ever.  Look, she made me this bow to my hat, and putin the feather last night.  There now, YOU are going to laugh at metoo.  But why should not I wear pink ribbons?  I do not care if it ISthe Doctor's favourite colour.  I am sure, for my part, I should neverhave known he DID like it better than any other colour, if he had nothappened to say so.  My cousins have been so plaguing me!  I declaresometimes I do not know which way to look before them."She had wandered away to a subject on which Elinor had nothing to say,and therefore soon judged it expedient to find her way back again tothe first."Well, but Miss Dashwood," speaking triumphantly, "people may say whatthey chuse about Mr. Ferrars's declaring he would not have Lucy, for itis no such thing I can tell you; and it is quite a shame for suchill-natured reports to be spread abroad.  Whatever Lucy might thinkabout it herself, you know, it was no business of other people to setit down for certain.""I never heard any thing of the kind hinted at before, I assure you,"said Elinor."Oh, did not you?  But it WAS said, I know, very well, and by more thanone; for Miss Godby told Miss Sparks, that nobody in their senses couldexpect Mr. Ferrars to give up a woman like Miss Morton, with thirtythousand pounds to her fortune, for Lucy Steele that had nothing atall; and I had it from Miss Sparks myself.  And besides that, my cousinRichard said himself, that when it came to the point he was afraid Mr.Ferrars would be off; and when Edward did not come near us for threedays, I could not tell what to think myself; and I believe in my heartLucy gave it up all for lost; for we came away from your brother'sWednesday, and we saw nothing of him not all Thursday, Friday, andSaturday, and did not know what was become of him.  Once Lucy thoughtto write to him, but then her spirits rose against that.  However thismorning he came just as we came home from church; and then it all cameout, how he had been sent for Wednesday to Harley Street, and beentalked to by his mother and all of them, and how he had declared beforethem all that he loved nobody but Lucy, and nobody but Lucy would hehave.  And how he had been so worried by what passed, that as soon ashe had went away from his mother's house, he had got upon his horse,and rid into the country, some where or other; and how he had stayedabout at an inn all Thursday and Friday, on purpose to get the betterof it.  And after thinking it all over and over again, he said, itseemed to him as if, now he had no fortune, and no nothing at all, itwould be quite unkind to keep her on to the engagement, because it mustbe for her loss, for he had nothing but two thousand pounds, and nohope of any thing else; and if he was to go into orders, as he had somethoughts, he could get nothing but a curacy, and how was they to liveupon that?--He could not bear to think of her doing no better, and sohe begged, if she had the least mind for it, to put an end to thematter directly, and leave him shift for himself.  I heard him say allthis as plain as could possibly be.  And it was entirely for HER sake,and upon HER account, that he said a word about being off, and not uponhis own.  I will take my oath he never dropt a syllable of being tiredof her, or of wishing to marry Miss Morton, or any thing like it.  But,to be sure, Lucy would not give ear to such kind of talking; so shetold him directly (with a great deal about sweet and love, you know,and all that--Oh, la! one can't repeat such kind of things youknow)--she told him directly, she had not the least mind in the worldto be off, for she could live with him upon a trifle, and how little soever he might have, she should be very glad to have it all, you know,or something of the kind.  So then he was monstrous happy, and talkedon some time about what they should do, and they agreed he should takeorders directly, and they must wait to be married till he got a living.And just then I could not hear any more, for my cousin called frombelow to tell me Mrs. Richardson was come in her coach, and would takeone of us to Kensington Gardens; so I was forced to go into the roomand interrupt them, to ask Lucy if she would like to go, but she didnot care to leave Edward; so I just run up stairs and put on a pair ofsilk stockings and came off with the Richardsons.""I do not understand what you mean by interrupting them," said Elinor;"you were all in the same room together, were not you?""No, indeed, not us.  La! Miss Dashwood, do you think people make lovewhen any body else is by?  Oh, for shame!--To be sure you must knowbetter than that.  (Laughing affectedly.)--No, no; they were shut up inthe drawing-room together, and all I heard was only by listening at thedoor.""How!" cried Elinor; "have you been repeating to me what you onlylearnt yourself by listening at the door?  I am sorry I did not know itbefore; for I certainly would not have suffered you to give meparticulars of a conversation which you ought not to have knownyourself.  How could you behave so unfairly by your sister?""Oh, la! there is nothing in THAT.  I only stood at the door, and heardwhat I could.  And I am sure Lucy would have done just the same by me;for a year or two back, when Martha Sharpe and I had so many secretstogether, she never made any bones of hiding in a closet, or behind achimney-board, on purpose to hear what we said."Elinor tried to talk of something else; but Miss Steele could not bekept beyond a couple of minutes, from what was uppermost in her mind."Edward talks of going to Oxford soon," said she; "but now he islodging at No. --, Pall Mall.  What an ill-natured woman his mother is,an't she? And your brother and sister were not very kind! However, Ishan't say anything against them to YOU; and to be sure they did sendus home in their own chariot, which was more than I looked for.  Andfor my part, I was all in a fright for fear your sister should ask usfor the huswifes she had gave us a day or two before; but, however,nothing was said about them, and I took care to keep mine out of sight.Edward have got some business at Oxford, he says; so he must go therefor a time; and after THAT, as soon as he can light upon a Bishop, hewill be ordained.  I wonder what curacy he will get!--Good gracious!(giggling as she spoke) I'd lay my life I know what my cousins willsay, when they hear of it.  They will tell me I should write to theDoctor, to get Edward the curacy of his new living.  I know they will;but I am sure I would not do such a thing for all the world.-- 'La!' Ishall say directly, 'I wonder how you could think of such a thing?  Iwrite to the Doctor, indeed!'""Well," said Elinor, "it is a comfort to be prepared against the worst.You have got your answer ready."Miss Steele was going to reply on the same subject, but the approach ofher own party made another more necessary."Oh, la! here come the Richardsons.  I had a vast deal more to say toyou, but I must not stay away from them not any longer.  I assure youthey are very genteel people.  He makes a monstrous deal of money, andthey keep their own coach.  I have not time to speak to Mrs. Jenningsabout it myself, but pray tell her I am quite happy to hear she is notin anger against us, and Lady Middleton the same; and if anythingshould happen to take you and your sister away, and Mrs. Jenningsshould want company, I am sure we should be very glad to come and staywith her for as long a time as she likes.  I suppose Lady Middletonwon't ask us any more this bout.  Good-by; I am sorry Miss Marianne wasnot here.  Remember me kindly to her.  La! if you have not got yourspotted muslin on!--I wonder you was not afraid of its being torn."Such was her parting concern; for after this, she had time only to payher farewell compliments to Mrs. Jennings, before her company wasclaimed by Mrs. Richardson; and Elinor was left in possession ofknowledge which might feed her powers of reflection some time, thoughshe had learnt very little more than what had been already foreseen andforeplanned in her own mind.  Edward's marriage with Lucy was as firmlydetermined on, and the time of its taking place remained as absolutelyuncertain, as she had concluded it would be;--every thing depended,exactly after her expectation, on his getting that preferment, ofwhich, at present, there seemed not the smallest chance.As soon as they returned to the carriage, Mrs. Jennings was eager forinformation; but as Elinor wished to spread as little as possibleintelligence that had in the first place been so unfairly obtained, sheconfined herself to the brief repetition of such simple particulars, asshe felt assured that Lucy, for the sake of her own consequence, wouldchoose to have known.  The continuance of their engagement, and themeans that were able to be taken for promoting its end, was all hercommunication; and this produced from Mrs. Jennings the followingnatural remark."Wait for his having a living!--ay, we all know how THAT willend:--they will wait a twelvemonth, and finding no good comes of it,will set down upon a curacy of fifty pounds a-year, with the interestof his two thousand pounds, and what little matter Mr. Steele and Mr.Pratt can give her.--Then they will have a child every year! and Lordhelp 'em! how poor they will be!--I must see what I can give themtowards furnishing their house.  Two maids and two men, indeed!--as Italked of t'other day.--No, no, they must get a stout girl of allworks.-- Betty's sister would never do for them NOW."The next morning brought Elinor a letter by the two-penny post fromLucy herself.  It was as follows:                    "Bartlett's Building, March.     "I hope my dear Miss Dashwood will excuse the     liberty I take of writing to her; but I know your     friendship for me will make you pleased to hear such     a good account of myself and my dear Edward, after     all the troubles we have went through lately,     therefore will make no more apologies, but proceed     to say that, thank God! though we have suffered     dreadfully, we are both quite well now, and as happy     as we must always be in one another's love.  We have     had great trials, and great persecutions, but     however, at the same time, gratefully acknowledge     many friends, yourself not the least among them,     whose great kindness I shall always thankfully     remember, as will Edward too, who I have told of     it.  I am sure you will be glad to hear, as likewise     dear Mrs. Jennings, I spent two happy hours with     him yesterday afternoon, he would not hear of our     parting, though earnestly did I, as I thought my     duty required, urge him to it for prudence sake,     and would have parted for ever on the spot, would     he consent to it; but he said it should never be,     he did not regard his mother's anger, while he could     have my affections; our prospects are not very     bright, to be sure, but we must wait, and hope for     the best; he will be ordained shortly; and should     it ever be in your power to recommend him to any     body that has a living to bestow, am very sure you     will not forget us, and dear Mrs. Jennings too,     trust she will speak a good word for us to Sir John,     or Mr. Palmer, or any friend that may be able to     assist us.--Poor Anne was much to blame for what     she did, but she did it for the best, so I say     nothing; hope Mrs. Jennings won't think it too much     trouble to give us a call, should she come this way     any morning, 'twould be a great kindness, and my     cousins would be proud to know her.--My paper reminds     me to conclude; and begging to be most gratefully     and respectfully remembered to her, and to Sir John,     and Lady Middleton, and the dear children, when you     chance to see them, and love to Miss Marianne,                                      "I am, &c."As soon as Elinor had finished it, she performed what she concluded tobe its writer's real design, by placing it in the hands of Mrs.Jennings, who read it aloud with many comments of satisfaction andpraise."Very well indeed!--how prettily she writes!--aye, that was quiteproper to let him be off if he would.  That was just like Lucy.--Poorsoul! I wish I COULD get him a living, with all my heart.--She calls medear Mrs. Jennings, you see.  She is a good-hearted girl as everlived.--Very well upon my word.  That sentence is very prettily turned.Yes, yes, I will go and see her, sure enough.  How attentive she is, tothink of every body!--Thank you, my dear, for shewing it me.  It is aspretty a letter as ever I saw, and does Lucy's head and heart greatcredit."The Miss Dashwoods had now been rather more than two months in town,and Marianne's impatience to be gone increased every day.  She sighedfor the air, the liberty, the quiet of the country; and fancied that ifany place could give her ease, Barton must do it.  Elinor was hardlyless anxious than herself for their removal, and only so much less benton its being effected immediately, as that she was conscious of thedifficulties of so long a journey, which Marianne could not be broughtto acknowledge.  She began, however, seriously to turn her thoughtstowards its accomplishment, and had already mentioned their wishes totheir kind hostess, who resisted them with all the eloquence of hergood-will, when a plan was suggested, which, though detaining them fromhome yet a few weeks longer, appeared to Elinor altogether much moreeligible than any other. The Palmers were to remove to Cleveland aboutthe end of March, for the Easter holidays; and Mrs. Jennings, with bothher friends, received a very warm invitation from Charlotte to go withthem.  This would not, in itself, have been sufficient for the delicacyof Miss Dashwood;--but it was inforced with so much real politeness byMr. Palmer himself, as, joined to the very great amendment of hismanners towards them since her sister had been known to be unhappy,induced her to accept it with pleasure.When she told Marianne what she had done, however, her first reply wasnot very auspicious."Cleveland!"--she cried, with great agitation.  "No, I cannot go toCleveland."--"You forget," said Elinor gently, "that its situation is not...that itis not in the neighbourhood of...""But it is in Somersetshire.--I cannot go into Somersetshire.--There,where I looked forward to going...No, Elinor, you cannot expect me togo there."Elinor would not argue upon the propriety of overcoming suchfeelings;--she only endeavoured to counteract them by working onothers;--represented it, therefore, as a measure which would fix thetime of her returning to that dear mother, whom she so much wished tosee, in a more eligible, more comfortable manner, than any other plancould do, and perhaps without any greater delay.  From Cleveland, whichwas within a few miles of Bristol, the distance to Barton was notbeyond one day, though a long day's journey; and their mother's servantmight easily come there to attend them down; and as there could be nooccasion of their staying above a week at Cleveland, they might now beat home in little more than three weeks' time.  As Marianne's affectionfor her mother was sincere, it must triumph with little difficulty,over the imaginary evils she had started.Mrs. Jennings was so far from being weary of her guests, that shepressed them very earnestly to return with her again from Cleveland.Elinor was grateful for the attention, but it could not alter herdesign; and their mother's concurrence being readily gained, everything relative to their return was arranged as far as it could be;--andMarianne found some relief in drawing up a statement of the hours thatwere yet to divide her from Barton."Ah! Colonel, I do not know what you and I shall do without the MissDashwoods;"--was Mrs. Jennings's address to him when he first called onher, after their leaving her was settled--"for they are quite resolvedupon going home from the Palmers;--and how forlorn we shall be, when Icome back!--Lord! we shall sit and gape at one another as dull as twocats."Perhaps Mrs. Jennings was in hopes, by this vigorous sketch of theirfuture ennui, to provoke him to make that offer, which might givehimself an escape from it;--and if so, she had soon afterwards goodreason to think her object gained; for, on Elinor's moving to thewindow to take more expeditiously the dimensions of a print, which shewas going to copy for her friend, he followed her to it with a look ofparticular meaning, and conversed with her there for several minutes.The effect of his discourse on the lady too, could not escape herobservation, for though she was too honorable to listen, and had evenchanged her seat, on purpose that she might NOT hear, to one close bythe piano forte on which Marianne was playing, she could not keepherself from seeing that Elinor changed colour, attended withagitation, and was too intent on what he said to pursue heremployment.-- Still farther in confirmation of her hopes, in theinterval of Marianne's turning from one lesson to another, some wordsof the Colonel's inevitably reached her ear, in which he seemed to beapologising for the badness of his house.  This set the matter beyond adoubt.  She wondered, indeed, at his thinking it necessary to do so;but supposed it to be the proper etiquette.  What Elinor said in replyshe could not distinguish, but judged from the motion of her lips, thatshe did not think THAT any material objection;--and Mrs. Jenningscommended her in her heart for being so honest.  They then talked onfor a few minutes longer without her catching a syllable, when anotherlucky stop in Marianne's performance brought her these words in theColonel's calm voice,--"I am afraid it cannot take place very soon."Astonished and shocked at so unlover-like a speech, she was almostready to cry out, "Lord! what should hinder it?"--but checking herdesire, confined herself to this silent ejaculation."This is very strange!--sure he need not wait to be older."This delay on the Colonel's side, however, did not seem to offend ormortify his fair companion in the least, for on their breaking up theconference soon afterwards, and moving different ways, Mrs. Jenningsvery plainly heard Elinor say, and with a voice which shewed her tofeel what she said,"I shall always think myself very much obliged to you."Mrs. Jennings was delighted with her gratitude, and only wondered thatafter hearing such a sentence, the Colonel should be able to take leaveof them, as he immediately did, with the utmost sang-froid, and go awaywithout making her any reply!--She had not thought her old friend couldhave made so indifferent a suitor.What had really passed between them was to this effect."I have heard," said he, with great compassion, "of the injustice yourfriend Mr. Ferrars has suffered from his family; for if I understandthe matter right, he has been entirely cast off by them for perseveringin his engagement with a very deserving young woman.-- Have I beenrightly informed?--Is it so?--"Elinor told him that it was."The cruelty, the impolitic cruelty,"--he replied, with greatfeeling,--"of dividing, or attempting to divide, two young people longattached to each other, is terrible.-- Mrs. Ferrars does not know whatshe may be doing--what she may drive her son to.  I have seen Mr.Ferrars two or three times in Harley Street, and am much pleased withhim.  He is not a young man with whom one can be intimately acquaintedin a short time, but I have seen enough of him to wish him well for hisown sake, and as a friend of yours, I wish it still more.  I understandthat he intends to take orders.  Will you be so good as to tell himthat the living of Delaford, now just vacant, as I am informed by thisday's post, is his, if he think it worth his acceptance--but THAT,perhaps, so unfortunately circumstanced as he is now, it may benonsense to appear to doubt; I only wish it were more  valuable.-- Itis a rectory, but a small one; the late incumbent, I believe, did notmake more than 200 L per annum, and though it is certainly capable ofimprovement, I fear, not to such an amount as to afford him a verycomfortable income.  Such as it is, however, my pleasure in presentingit to him, will be very great.  Pray assure him of it."Elinor's astonishment at this commission could hardly have beengreater, had the Colonel been really making her an offer of his hand.The preferment, which only two days before she had considered ashopeless for Edward, was already provided to enable him to marry;--andSHE, of all people in the world, was fixed on to bestow it!--Heremotion was such as Mrs. Jennings had attributed to a very differentcause;--but whatever minor feelings less pure, less pleasing, mighthave a share in that emotion, her esteem for the general benevolence,and her gratitude for the particular friendship, which togetherprompted Colonel Brandon to this act, were strongly felt, and warmlyexpressed.  She thanked him for it with all her heart, spoke ofEdward's principles and disposition with that praise which she knewthem to deserve; and promised to undertake the commission withpleasure, if it were really his wish to put off so agreeable an officeto another.  But at the same time, she could not help thinking that noone could so well perform it as himself.  It was an office in short,from which, unwilling to give Edward the pain of receiving anobligation from HER, she would have been very glad to be sparedherself;-- but Colonel Brandon, on motives of equal delicacy, decliningit likewise, still seemed so desirous of its being given through hermeans, that she would not on any account make farther opposition.Edward, she believed, was still in town, and fortunately she had heardhis address from Miss Steele.  She could undertake therefore to informhim of it, in the course of the day.  After this had been settled,Colonel Brandon began to talk of his own advantage in securing sorespectable and agreeable a neighbour, and THEN it was that hementioned with regret, that the house was small and indifferent;--anevil which Elinor, as Mrs. Jennings had supposed her to do, made verylight of, at least as far as regarded its size."The smallness of the house," said she, "I cannot imagine anyinconvenience to them, for it will be in proportion to their family andincome."By which the Colonel was surprised to find that SHE was considering Mr.Ferrars's marriage as the certain consequence of the presentation; forhe did not suppose it possible that Delaford living could supply suchan income, as anybody in his style of life would venture to settleon--and he said so."This little rectory CAN do no more than make Mr. Ferrars comfortableas a bachelor; it cannot enable him to marry.  I am sorry to say thatmy patronage ends with this; and my interest is hardly more extensive.If, however, by an unforeseen chance it should be in my power to servehim farther, I must think very differently of him from what I now do,if I am not as ready to be useful to him then as I sincerely wish Icould be at present.  What I am now doing indeed, seems nothing at all,since it can advance him so little towards what must be his principal,his only object of happiness.  His marriage must still be a distantgood;--at least, I am afraid it cannot take place very soon.--"Such was the sentence which, when misunderstood, so justly offended thedelicate feelings of Mrs. Jennings; but after this narration of whatreally passed between Colonel Brandon and Elinor, while they stood atthe window, the gratitude expressed by the latter on their parting, mayperhaps appear in general, not less reasonably excited, nor lessproperly worded than if it had arisen from an offer of marriage."Well, Miss Dashwood," said Mrs. Jennings, sagaciously smiling, as soonas the gentleman had withdrawn, "I do not ask you what the Colonel hasbeen saying to you; for though, upon my honour, I TRIED to keep out ofhearing, I could not help catching enough to understand his business.And I assure you I never was better pleased in my life, and I wish youjoy of it with all my heart.""Thank you, ma'am," said Elinor.  "It is a matter of great joy to me;and I feel the goodness of Colonel Brandon most sensibly.  There arenot many men who would act as he has done.  Few people who have socompassionate a heart!  I never was more astonished in my life.""Lord! my dear, you are very modest.  I an't the least astonished at itin the world, for I have often thought of late, there was nothing morelikely to happen.""You judged from your knowledge of the Colonel's general benevolence;but at least you could not foresee that the opportunity would so verysoon occur.""Opportunity!" repeated Mrs. Jennings--"Oh! as to that, when a man hasonce made up his mind to such a thing, somehow or other he will soonfind an opportunity.  Well, my dear, I wish you joy of it again andagain; and if ever there was a happy couple in the world, I think Ishall soon know where to look for them.""You mean to go to Delaford after them I suppose," said Elinor, with afaint smile."Aye, my dear, that I do, indeed.  And as to the house being a bad one,I do not know what the Colonel would be at, for it is as good a one asever I saw.""He spoke of its being out of repair.""Well, and whose fault is that? why don't he repair it?--who should doit but himself?"They were interrupted by the servant's coming in to announce thecarriage being at the door; and Mrs. Jennings immediately preparing togo, said,--"Well, my dear, I must be gone before I have had half my talk out.But, however, we may have it all over in the evening; for we shall bequite alone.  I do not ask you to go with me, for I dare say your mindis too full of the matter to care for company; and besides, you mustlong to tell your sister all about it."Marianne had left the room before the conversation began."Certainly, ma'am, I shall tell Marianne of it; but I shall not mentionit at present to any body else.""Oh! very well," said Mrs. Jennings rather disappointed.  "Then youwould not have me tell it to Lucy, for I think of going as far asHolborn to-day.""No, ma'am, not even Lucy if you please.  One day's delay will not bevery material; and till I have written to Mr. Ferrars, I think it oughtnot to be mentioned to any body else.  I shall do THAT directly.  It isof importance that no time should be lost with him, for he will ofcourse have much to do relative to his ordination."This speech at first puzzled Mrs. Jennings exceedingly.  Why Mr.Ferrars was to have been written to about it in such a hurry, she couldnot immediately comprehend.  A few moments' reflection, however,produced a very happy idea, and she exclaimed;--"Oh, ho!--I understand you.  Mr. Ferrars is to be the man.  Well, somuch the better for him.  Ay, to be sure, he must be ordained inreadiness; and I am very glad to find things are so forward betweenyou.  But, my dear, is not this rather out of character?  Should notthe Colonel write himself?--sure, he is the proper person."Elinor did not quite understand the beginning of Mrs. Jennings'sspeech, neither did she think it worth inquiring into; and thereforeonly replied to its conclusion."Colonel Brandon is so delicate a man, that he rather wished any one toannounce his intentions to Mr. Ferrars than himself.""And so YOU are forced to do it.  Well THAT is an odd kind of delicacy!However, I will not disturb you (seeing her preparing to write.)  Youknow your own concerns best.  So goodby, my dear.  I have not heard ofany thing to please me so well since Charlotte was brought to bed."And away she went; but returning again in a moment,"I have just been thinking of Betty's sister, my dear.  I should bevery glad to get her so good a mistress.  But whether she would do fora lady's maid, I am sure I can't tell.  She is an excellent housemaid,and works very well at her needle.  However, you will think of all thatat your leisure.""Certainly, ma'am," replied Elinor, not hearing much of what she said,and more anxious to be alone, than to be mistress of the subject.How she should begin--how she should express herself in her note toEdward, was now all her concern.  The particular circumstances betweenthem made a difficulty of that which to any other person would havebeen the easiest thing in the world; but she equally feared to say toomuch or too little, and sat deliberating over her paper, with the penin her hand, till broken in on by the entrance of Edward himself.He had met Mrs. Jennings at the door in her way to the carriage, as hecame to leave his farewell card; and she, after apologising for notreturning herself, had obliged him to enter, by saying that MissDashwood was above, and wanted to speak with him on very particularbusiness.Elinor had just been congratulating herself, in the midst of herperplexity, that however difficult it might be to express herselfproperly by letter, it was at least preferable to giving theinformation by word of mouth, when her visitor entered, to force herupon this greatest exertion of all.  Her astonishment and confusionwere very great on his so sudden appearance.  She had not seen himbefore since his engagement became public, and therefore not since hisknowing her to be acquainted with it; which, with the consciousness ofwhat she had been thinking of, and what she had to tell him, made herfeel particularly uncomfortable for some minutes.  He too was muchdistressed; and they sat down together in a most promising state ofembarrassment.--Whether he had asked her pardon for his intrusion onfirst coming into the room, he could not recollect; but determining tobe on the safe side, he made his apology in form as soon as he couldsay any thing, after taking a chair."Mrs. Jennings told me," said he, "that you wished to speak with me, atleast I understood her so--or I certainly should not have intruded onyou in such a manner; though at the same time, I should have beenextremely sorry to leave London without seeing you and your sister;especially as it will most likely be some time--it is not probable thatI should soon have the pleasure of meeting you again.  I go to Oxfordtomorrow.""You would not have gone, however," said Elinor, recovering herself,and determined to get over what she so much dreaded as soon aspossible, "without receiving our good wishes, even if we had not beenable to give them in person.  Mrs. Jennings was quite right in what shesaid.  I have something of consequence to inform you of, which I was onthe point of communicating by paper.  I am charged with a mostagreeable office (breathing rather faster than usual as she spoke.)Colonel Brandon, who was here only ten minutes ago, has desired me tosay, that understanding you mean to take orders, he has great pleasurein offering you the living of Delaford now just vacant, and only wishesit were more valuable.  Allow me to congratulate you on having sorespectable and well-judging a friend, and to join in his wish that theliving--it is about two hundred a-year--were much more considerable,and such as might better enable you to--as might be more than atemporary accommodation to yourself--such, in short, as might establishall your views of happiness."What Edward felt, as he could not say it himself, it cannot be expectedthat any one else should say for him.  He LOOKED all the astonishmentwhich such unexpected, such unthought-of information could not fail ofexciting; but he said only these two words,"Colonel Brandon!""Yes," continued Elinor, gathering more resolution, as some of theworst was over, "Colonel Brandon means it as a testimony of his concernfor what has lately passed--for the cruel situation in which theunjustifiable conduct of your family has placed you--a concern which Iam sure Marianne, myself, and all your friends, must share; andlikewise as a proof of his high esteem for your general character, andhis particular approbation of your behaviour on the present occasion.""Colonel Brandon give ME a living!--Can it be possible?""The unkindness of your own relations has made you astonished to findfriendship any where.""No," replied he, with sudden consciousness, "not to find it in YOU;for I cannot be ignorant that to you, to your goodness, I owe itall.--I feel it--I would express it if I could--but, as you well know,I am no orator.""You are very much mistaken.  I do assure you that you owe it entirely,at least almost entirely, to your own merit, and Colonel Brandon'sdiscernment of it.  I have had no hand in it.  I did not even know,till I understood his design, that the living was vacant; nor had itever occurred to me that he might have had such a living in his gift.As a friend of mine, of my family, he may, perhaps--indeed I know heHAS, still greater pleasure in bestowing it; but, upon my word, you owenothing to my solicitation."Truth obliged her to acknowledge some small share in the action, butshe was at the same time so unwilling to appear as the benefactress ofEdward, that she acknowledged it with hesitation; which probablycontributed to fix that suspicion in his mind which had recentlyentered it.  For a short time he sat deep in thought, after Elinor hadceased to speak;--at last, and as if it were rather an effort, he said,"Colonel Brandon seems a man of great worth and respectability.  I havealways heard him spoken of as such, and your brother I know esteems himhighly.  He is undoubtedly a sensible man, and in his manners perfectlythe gentleman.""Indeed," replied Elinor, "I believe that you will find him, on fartheracquaintance, all that you have heard him to be, and as you will besuch very near neighbours (for I understand the parsonage is almostclose to the mansion-house,) it is particularly important that heSHOULD be all this."Edward made no answer; but when she had turned away her head, gave hera look so serious, so earnest, so uncheerful, as seemed to say, that hemight hereafter wish the distance between the parsonage and themansion-house much greater."Colonel Brandon, I think, lodges in St. James Street," said he, soonafterwards, rising from his chair.Elinor told him the number of the house."I must hurry away then, to give him those thanks which you will notallow me to give YOU; to assure him that he has made me a very--anexceedingly happy man."Elinor did not offer to detain him; and they parted, with a veryearnest assurance on HER side of her unceasing good wishes for hishappiness in every change of situation that might befall him; on HIS,with rather an attempt to return the same good will, than the power ofexpressing it."When I see him again," said Elinor to herself, as the door shut himout, "I shall see him the husband of Lucy."And with this pleasing anticipation, she sat down to reconsider thepast, recall the words and endeavour to comprehend all the feelings ofEdward; and, of course, to reflect on her own with discontent.When Mrs. Jennings came home, though she returned from seeing peoplewhom she had never seen before, and of whom therefore she must have agreat deal to say, her mind was so much more occupied by the importantsecret in her possession, than by anything else, that she reverted toit again as soon as Elinor appeared."Well, my dear," she cried, "I sent you up the young man.  Did not Ido right?--And I suppose you had no great difficulty--You did not findhim very unwilling to accept your proposal?""No, ma'am; THAT was not very likely.""Well, and how soon will he be ready?--For it seems all to depend uponthat.""Really," said Elinor, "I know so little of these kind of forms, that Ican hardly even conjecture as to the time, or the preparationnecessary; but I suppose two or three months will complete hisordination.""Two or three months!" cried Mrs. Jennings; "Lord! my dear, how calmlyyou talk of it; and can the Colonel wait two or three months! Lordbless me!--I am sure it would put ME quite out of patience!--And thoughone would be very glad to do a kindness by poor Mr. Ferrars, I do thinkit is not worth while to wait two or three months for him.  Suresomebody else might be found that would do as well; somebody that is inorders already.""My dear ma'am," said Elinor, "what can you be thinking of?-- Why,Colonel Brandon's only object is to be of use to Mr. Ferrars.""Lord bless you, my dear!--Sure you do not mean to persuade me that theColonel only marries you for the sake of giving ten guineas to Mr.Ferrars!"The deception could not continue after this; and an explanationimmediately took place, by which both gained considerable amusement forthe moment, without any material loss of happiness to either, for Mrs.Jennings only exchanged one form of delight for another, and stillwithout forfeiting her expectation of the first."Aye, aye, the parsonage is but a small one," said she, after the firstebullition of surprise and satisfaction was over, "and very likely MAYbe out of repair; but to hear a man apologising, as I thought, for ahouse that to my knowledge has five sitting rooms on the ground-floor,and I think the housekeeper told me could make up fifteen beds!--and toyou too, that had been used to live in Barton cottage!-- It seems quiteridiculous.  But, my dear, we must touch up the Colonel to do something to the parsonage, and make it comfortable for them, before Lucygoes to it.""But Colonel Brandon does not seem to have any idea of the living'sbeing enough to allow them to marry.""The Colonel is a ninny, my dear; because he has two thousand a-yearhimself, he thinks that nobody else can marry on less.  Take my wordfor it, that, if I am alive, I shall be paying a visit at DelafordParsonage before Michaelmas; and I am sure I shan't go if Lucy an'tthere."Elinor was quite of her opinion, as to the probability of their notwaiting for any thing more.Edward, having carried his thanks to Colonel Brandon, proceeded withhis happiness to Lucy; and such was the excess of it by the time hereached Bartlett's Buildings, that she was able to assure Mrs.Jennings, who called on her again the next day with hercongratulations, that she had never seen him in such spirits before inher life.Her own happiness, and her own spirits, were at least very certain; andshe joined Mrs. Jennings most heartily in her expectation of theirbeing all comfortably together in Delaford Parsonage before Michaelmas.So far was she, at the same time, from any backwardness to give Elinorthat credit which Edward WOULD give her, that she spoke of herfriendship for them both with the most grateful warmth, was ready toown all their obligation to her, and openly declared that no exertionfor their good on Miss Dashwood's part, either present or future, wouldever surprise her, for she believed her capable of doing any thing inthe world for those she really valued.  As for Colonel Brandon, she wasnot only ready to worship him as a saint, but was moreover trulyanxious that he should be treated as one in all worldly concerns;anxious that his tithes should be raised to the utmost; and scarcelyresolved to avail herself, at Delaford, as far as she possibly could,of his servants, his carriage, his cows, and his poultry.It was now above a week since John Dashwood had called in BerkeleyStreet, and as since that time no notice had been taken by them of hiswife's indisposition, beyond one verbal enquiry, Elinor began to feelit necessary to pay her a visit.--This was an obligation, however,which not only opposed her own inclination, but which had not theassistance of any encouragement from her companions.  Marianne, notcontented with absolutely refusing to go herself, was very urgent toprevent her sister's going at all; and Mrs. Jennings, though hercarriage was always at Elinor's service, so very much disliked Mrs.John Dashwood, that not even her curiosity to see how she looked afterthe late discovery, nor her strong desire to affront her by takingEdward's part, could overcome her unwillingness to be in her companyagain.  The consequence was, that Elinor set out by herself to pay avisit, for which no one could really have less inclination, and to runthe risk of a tete-a-tete with a woman, whom neither of the others hadso much reason to dislike.Mrs. Dashwood was denied; but before the carriage could turn from thehouse, her husband accidentally came out.  He expressed great pleasurein meeting Elinor, told her that he had been just going to call inBerkeley Street, and, assuring her that Fanny would be very glad to seeher, invited her to come in.They walked up stairs in to the drawing-room.--Nobody was there."Fanny is in her own room, I suppose," said he:--"I will go to herpresently, for I am sure she will not have the least objection in theworld to seeing YOU.-- Very far from it, indeed.  NOW especially therecannot be--but however, you and Marianne were always greatfavourites.--Why would not Marianne come?"--Elinor made what excuse she could for her."I am not sorry to see you alone," he replied, "for I have a good dealto say to you.  This living of Colonel Brandon's--can it be true?--hashe really given it to Edward?--I heard it yesterday by chance, and wascoming to you on purpose to enquire farther about it.""It is perfectly true.--Colonel Brandon has given the living ofDelaford to Edward.""Really!--Well, this is very astonishing!--no relationship!--noconnection between them!--and now that livings fetch such aprice!--what was the value of this?""About two hundred a year.""Very well--and for the next presentation to a living of thatvalue--supposing the late incumbent to have been old and sickly, andlikely to vacate it soon--he might have got I dare say--fourteenhundred pounds.  And how came he not to have settled that matter beforethis person's death?--NOW indeed it would be too late to sell it, but aman of Colonel Brandon's sense!--I wonder he should be so improvidentin a point of such common, such natural, concern!--Well, I am convincedthat there is a vast deal of inconsistency in almost every humancharacter.  I suppose, however--on recollection--that the case mayprobably be THIS.  Edward is only to hold the living till the person towhom the Colonel has really sold the presentation, is old enough totake it.--Aye, aye, that is the fact, depend upon it."Elinor contradicted it, however, very positively; and by relating thatshe had herself been employed in conveying the offer from ColonelBrandon to Edward, and, therefore, must understand the terms on whichit was given, obliged him to submit to her authority."It is truly astonishing!"--he cried, after hearing what shesaid--"what could be the Colonel's motive?""A very simple one--to be of use to Mr. Ferrars.""Well, well; whatever Colonel Brandon may be, Edward is a very luckyman.--You will not mention the matter to Fanny, however, for though Ihave broke it to her, and she bears it vastly well,--she will not liketo hear it much talked of."Elinor had some difficulty here to refrain from observing, that shethought Fanny might have borne with composure, an acquisition of wealthto her brother, by which neither she nor her child could be possiblyimpoverished."Mrs. Ferrars," added he, lowering his voice to the tone becoming soimportant a subject, "knows nothing about it at present, and I believeit will be best to keep it entirely concealed from her as long as maybe.-- When the marriage takes place, I fear she must hear of it all.""But why should such precaution be used?--Though it is not to besupposed that Mrs. Ferrars can have the smallest satisfaction inknowing that her son has money enough to live upon,--for THAT must bequite out of the question; yet why, upon her late behaviour, is shesupposed to feel at all?--She has done with her son, she cast him offfor ever, and has made all those over whom she had any influence, casthim off likewise.  Surely, after doing so, she cannot be imaginedliable to any impression of sorrow or of joy on his account--she cannotbe interested in any thing that befalls him.-- She would not be so weakas to throw away the comfort of a child, and yet retain the anxiety ofa parent!""Ah! Elinor," said John, "your reasoning is very good, but it isfounded on ignorance of human nature.  When Edward's unhappy matchtakes place, depend upon it his mother will feel as much as if she hadnever discarded him; and, therefore every circumstance that mayaccelerate that dreadful event, must be concealed from her as much aspossible.  Mrs. Ferrars can never forget that Edward is her son.""You surprise me; I should think it must nearly have escaped her memoryby THIS time.""You wrong her exceedingly.  Mrs. Ferrars is one of the mostaffectionate mothers in the world."Elinor was silent."We think NOW,"--said Mr. Dashwood, after a short pause, "of ROBERT'Smarrying Miss Morton."Elinor, smiling at the grave and decisive importance of her brother'stone, calmly replied,"The lady, I suppose, has no choice in the affair.""Choice!--how do you mean?""I only mean that I suppose, from your manner of speaking, it must bethe same to Miss Morton whether she marry Edward or Robert.""Certainly, there can be no difference; for Robert will now to allintents and purposes be considered as the eldest son;--and as to anything else, they are both very agreeable young men: I do not know thatone is superior to the other."Elinor said no more, and John was also for a short time silent.--Hisreflections ended thus."Of ONE thing, my dear sister," kindly taking her hand, and speaking inan awful whisper,--"I may assure you;--and I WILL do it, because I knowit must gratify you.  I have good reason to think--indeed I have itfrom the best authority, or I should not repeat it, for otherwise itwould be very wrong to say any thing about it--but I have it from thevery best authority--not that I ever precisely heard Mrs. Ferrars sayit herself--but her daughter DID, and I have it from her--That inshort, whatever objections there might be against a certain--a certainconnection--you understand me--it would have been far preferable toher, it would not have given her half the vexation that THIS does.  Iwas exceedingly pleased to hear that Mrs. Ferrars considered it in thatlight--a very gratifying circumstance you know to us all.  'It wouldhave been beyond comparison,' she said, 'the least evil of the two, andshe would be glad to compound NOW for nothing worse.' But however, allthat is quite out of the question--not to be thought of ormentioned--as to any attachment you know--it never could be--all thatis gone by.  But I thought I would just tell you of this, because Iknew how much it must please you.  Not that you have any reason toregret, my dear Elinor.  There is no doubt of your doing exceedinglywell--quite as well, or better, perhaps, all things considered.  HasColonel Brandon been with you lately?"Elinor had heard enough, if not to gratify her vanity, and raise herself-importance, to agitate her nerves and fill her mind;--and she wastherefore glad to be spared from the necessity of saying much in replyherself, and from the danger of hearing any thing more from herbrother, by the entrance of Mr. Robert Ferrars.  After a few moments'chat, John Dashwood, recollecting that Fanny was yet uninformed of hersister's being there, quitted the room in quest of her; and Elinor wasleft to improve her acquaintance with Robert, who, by the gayunconcern, the happy self-complacency of his manner while enjoying sounfair a division of his mother's love and liberality, to the prejudiceof his banished brother, earned only by his own dissipated course oflife, and that brother's integrity, was confirming her mostunfavourable opinion of his head and heart.They had scarcely been two minutes by themselves, before he began tospeak of Edward; for he, too, had heard of the living, and was veryinquisitive on the subject.  Elinor repeated the particulars of it, asshe had given them to John; and their effect on Robert, though verydifferent, was not less striking than it had been on HIM.  He laughedmost immoderately.  The idea of Edward's being a clergyman, and livingin a small parsonage-house, diverted him beyond measure;--and when tothat was added the fanciful imagery of Edward reading prayers in awhite surplice, and publishing the banns of marriage between John Smithand Mary Brown, he could conceive nothing more ridiculous.Elinor, while she waited in silence and immovable gravity, theconclusion of such folly, could not restrain her eyes from being fixedon him with a look that spoke all the contempt it excited.  It was alook, however, very well bestowed, for it relieved her own feelings,and gave no intelligence to him.  He was recalled from wit to wisdom,not by any reproof of hers, but by his own sensibility."We may treat it as a joke," said he, at last, recovering from theaffected laugh which had considerably lengthened out the genuine gaietyof the moment--"but, upon my soul, it is a most serious business.  PoorEdward!  he is ruined for ever.  I am extremely sorry for it--for Iknow him to be a very good-hearted creature; as well-meaning a fellowperhaps, as any in the world.  You must not judge of him, MissDashwood, from YOUR slight acquaintance.--Poor Edward!--His manners arecertainly not the happiest in nature.--But we are not all born, youknow, with the same powers,--the same address.-- Poor fellow!--to seehim in a circle of strangers!--to be sure it was pitiable enough!--butupon my soul, I believe he has as good a heart as any in the kingdom;and I declare and protest to you I never was so shocked in my life, aswhen it all burst forth.  I could not believe it.-- My mother was thefirst person who told me of it; and I, feeling myself called on to actwith resolution, immediately said to her, 'My dear madam, I do not knowwhat you may intend to do on the occasion, but as for myself, I mustsay, that if Edward does marry this young woman, I never will see himagain.' That was what I said immediately.-- I was most uncommonlyshocked, indeed!--Poor Edward!--he has done for himselfcompletely--shut himself out for ever from all decent society!--but, asI directly said to my mother, I am not in the least surprised at it;from his style of education, it was always to be expected.  My poormother was half frantic.""Have you ever seen the lady?""Yes; once, while she was staying in this house, I happened to drop infor ten minutes; and I saw quite enough of her.  The merest awkwardcountry girl, without style, or elegance, and almost without beauty.--I remember her perfectly.  Just the kind of girl I should supposelikely to captivate poor Edward.  I offered immediately, as soon as mymother related the affair to me, to talk to him myself, and dissuadehim from the match; but it was too late THEN, I found, to do any thing,for unluckily, I was not in the way at first, and knew nothing of ittill after the breach had taken place, when it was not for me, youknow, to interfere.  But had I been informed of it a few hoursearlier--I think it is most probable--that something might have beenhit on.  I certainly should have represented it to Edward in a verystrong light.  'My dear fellow,' I should have said, 'consider what youare doing.  You are making a most disgraceful connection, and such aone as your family are unanimous in disapproving.' I cannot helpthinking, in short, that means might have been found.  But now it isall too late.  He must be starved, you know;--that is certain;absolutely starved."He had just settled this point with great composure, when the entranceof Mrs. John Dashwood put an end to the subject.  But though SHE neverspoke of it out of her own family, Elinor could see its influence onher mind, in the something like confusion of countenance with which sheentered, and an attempt at cordiality in her behaviour to herself.  Sheeven proceeded so far as to be concerned to find that Elinor and hersister were so soon to leave town, as she had hoped to see more ofthem;--an exertion in which her husband, who attended her into theroom, and hung enamoured over her accents, seemed to distinguish everything that was most affectionate and graceful.One other short call in Harley Street, in which Elinor received herbrother's congratulations on their travelling so far towards Bartonwithout any expense, and on Colonel Brandon's being to follow them toCleveland in a day or two, completed the intercourse of the brother andsisters in town;--and a faint invitation from Fanny, to come to Norlandwhenever it should happen to be in their way, which of all things wasthe most unlikely to occur, with a more warm, though less public,assurance, from John to Elinor, of the promptitude with which he shouldcome to see her at Delaford, was all that foretold any meeting in thecountry.It amused her to observe that all her friends seemed determined to sendher to Delaford;--a place, in which, of all others, she would now leastchuse to visit, or wish to reside; for not only was it considered asher future home by her brother and Mrs. Jennings, but even Lucy, whenthey parted, gave her a pressing invitation to visit her there.Very early in April, and tolerably early in the day, the two partiesfrom Hanover Square and Berkeley Street set out from their respectivehomes, to meet, by appointment, on the road.  For the convenience ofCharlotte and her child, they were to be more than two days on theirjourney, and Mr. Palmer, travelling more expeditiously with ColonelBrandon, was to join them at Cleveland soon after their arrival.Marianne, few as had been her hours of comfort in London, and eager asshe had long been to quit it, could not, when it came to the point, bidadieu to the house in which she had for the last time enjoyed thosehopes, and that confidence, in Willoughby, which were now extinguishedfor ever, without great pain.  Nor could she leave the place in whichWilloughby remained, busy in new engagements, and new schemes, in whichSHE could have no share, without shedding many tears.Elinor's satisfaction, at the moment of removal, was more positive.She had no such object for her lingering thoughts to fix on, she leftno creature behind, from whom it would give her a moment's regret to bedivided for ever, she was pleased to be free herself from thepersecution of Lucy's friendship, she was grateful for bringing hersister away unseen by Willoughby since his marriage, and she lookedforward with hope to what a few months of tranquility at Barton mightdo towards restoring Marianne's peace of mind, and confirming her own.Their journey was safely performed.  The second day brought them intothe cherished, or the prohibited, county of Somerset, for as such wasit dwelt on by turns in Marianne's imagination; and in the forenoon ofthe third they drove up to Cleveland.Cleveland was a spacious, modern-built house, situated on a slopinglawn.  It had no park, but the pleasure-grounds were tolerablyextensive; and like every other place of the same degree of importance,it had its open shrubbery, and closer wood walk, a road of smoothgravel winding round a plantation, led to the front, the lawn wasdotted over with timber, the house itself was under the guardianship ofthe fir, the mountain-ash, and the acacia, and a thick screen of themaltogether, interspersed with tall Lombardy poplars, shut out theoffices.Marianne entered the house with a heart swelling with emotion from theconsciousness of being only eighty miles from Barton, and not thirtyfrom Combe Magna; and before she had been five minutes within itswalls, while the others were busily helping Charlotte to show her childto the housekeeper, she quitted it again, stealing away through thewinding shrubberies, now just beginning to be in beauty, to gain adistant eminence; where, from its Grecian temple, her eye, wanderingover a wide tract of country to the south-east, could fondly rest onthe farthest ridge of hills in the horizon, and fancy that from theirsummits Combe Magna might be seen.In such moments of precious, invaluable misery, she rejoiced in tearsof agony to be at Cleveland; and as she returned by a different circuitto the house, feeling all the happy privilege of country liberty, ofwandering from place to place in free and luxurious solitude, sheresolved to spend almost every hour of every day while she remainedwith the Palmers, in the indulgence of such solitary rambles.She returned just in time to join the others as they quitted the house,on an excursion through its more immediate premises; and the rest ofthe morning was easily whiled away, in lounging round the kitchengarden, examining the bloom upon its walls, and listening to thegardener's lamentations upon blights, in dawdling through thegreen-house, where the loss of her favourite plants, unwarily exposed,and nipped by the lingering frost, raised the laughter ofCharlotte,--and in visiting her poultry-yard, where, in thedisappointed hopes of her dairy-maid, by hens forsaking their nests, orbeing stolen by a fox, or in the rapid decrease of a promising youngbrood, she found fresh sources of merriment.The morning was fine and dry, and Marianne, in her plan of employmentabroad, had not calculated for any change of weather during their stayat Cleveland.  With great surprise therefore, did she find herselfprevented by a settled rain from going out again after dinner.  She haddepended on a twilight walk to the Grecian temple, and perhaps all overthe grounds, and an evening merely cold or damp would not have deterredher from it; but a heavy and settled rain even SHE could not fancy dryor pleasant weather for walking.Their party was small, and the hours passed quietly away.  Mrs. Palmerhad her child, and Mrs. Jennings her carpet-work; they talked of thefriends they had left behind, arranged Lady Middleton's engagements,and wondered whether Mr. Palmer and Colonel Brandon would get fartherthan Reading that night.  Elinor, however little concerned in it,joined in their discourse; and Marianne, who had the knack of findingher way in every house to the library, however it might be avoided bythe family in general, soon procured herself a book.Nothing was wanting on Mrs. Palmer's side that constant and friendlygood humour could do, to make them feel themselves welcome.  Theopenness and heartiness of her manner more than atoned for that want ofrecollection and elegance which made her often deficient in the formsof politeness; her kindness, recommended by so pretty a face, wasengaging; her folly, though evident was not disgusting, because it wasnot conceited; and Elinor could have forgiven every thing but her laugh.The two gentlemen arrived the next day to a very late dinner, affordinga pleasant enlargement of the party, and a very welcome variety totheir conversation, which a long morning of the same continued rain hadreduced very low.Elinor had seen so little of Mr. Palmer, and in that little had seen somuch variety in his address to her sister and herself, that she knewnot what to expect to find him in his own family.  She found him,however, perfectly the gentleman in his behaviour to all his visitors,and only occasionally rude to his wife and her mother; she found himvery capable of being a pleasant companion, and only prevented frombeing so always, by too great an aptitude to fancy himself as muchsuperior to people in general, as he must feel himself to be to Mrs.Jennings and Charlotte.  For the rest of his character and habits, theywere marked, as far as Elinor could perceive, with no traits at allunusual in his sex and time of life.  He was nice in his eating,uncertain in his hours; fond of his child, though affecting to slightit; and idled away the mornings at billiards, which ought to have beendevoted to business.  She liked him, however, upon the whole, muchbetter than she had expected, and in her heart was not sorry that shecould like him no more;--not sorry to be driven by the observation ofhis Epicurism, his selfishness, and his conceit, to rest withcomplacency on the remembrance of Edward's generous temper, simpletaste, and diffident feelings.Of Edward, or at least of some of his concerns, she now receivedintelligence from Colonel Brandon, who had been into Dorsetshirelately; and who, treating her at once as the disinterested friend ofMr. Ferrars, and the kind confidante of himself, talked to her agreat deal of the parsonage at Delaford, described its deficiencies,and told her what he meant to do himself towards removing them.--Hisbehaviour to her in this, as well as in every other particular, hisopen pleasure in meeting her after an absence of only ten days, hisreadiness to converse with her, and his deference for her opinion,might very well justify Mrs. Jennings's persuasion of his attachment,and would have been enough, perhaps, had not Elinor still, as from thefirst, believed Marianne his real favourite, to make her suspect itherself.  But as it was, such a notion had scarcely ever entered herhead, except by Mrs. Jennings's suggestion; and she could not helpbelieving herself the nicest observer of the two;--she watched hiseyes, while Mrs. Jennings thought only of his behaviour;--and while hislooks of anxious solicitude on Marianne's feeling, in her head andthroat, the beginning of a heavy cold, because unexpressed by words,entirely escaped the latter lady's observation;--SHE could discover inthem the quick feelings, and needless alarm of a lover.Two delightful twilight walks on the third and fourth evenings of herbeing there, not merely on the dry gravel of the shrubbery, but allover the grounds, and especially in the most distant parts of them,where there was something more of wildness than in the rest, where thetrees were the oldest, and the grass was the longest and wettest,had--assisted by the still greater imprudence of sitting in her wetshoes and stockings--given Marianne a cold so violent as, though for aday or two trifled with or denied, would force itself by increasingailments on the concern of every body, and the notice of herself.Prescriptions poured in from all quarters, and as usual, were alldeclined.  Though heavy and feverish, with a pain in her limbs, and acough, and a sore throat, a good night's rest was to cure her entirely;and it was with difficulty that Elinor prevailed on her, when she wentto bed, to try one or two of the simplest of the remedies.Marianne got up the next morning at her usual time; to every inquiryreplied that she was better, and tried to prove herself so, by engagingin her accustomary employments.  But a day spent in sitting shiveringover the fire with a book in her hand, which she was unable to read, orin lying, weary and languid, on a sofa, did not speak much in favour ofher amendment; and when, at last, she went early to bed, more and moreindisposed, Colonel Brandon was only astonished at her sister'scomposure, who, though attending and nursing her the whole day, againstMarianne's inclination, and forcing proper medicines on her at night,trusted, like Marianne, to the certainty and efficacy of sleep, andfelt no real alarm.A very restless and feverish night, however, disappointed theexpectation of both; and when Marianne, after persisting in rising,confessed herself unable to sit up, and returned voluntarily to herbed, Elinor was very ready to adopt Mrs. Jennings's advice, of sendingfor the Palmers' apothecary.He came, examined his patient, and though encouraging Miss Dashwood toexpect that a very few days would restore her sister to health, yet, bypronouncing her disorder to have a putrid tendency, and allowing theword "infection" to pass his lips, gave instant alarm to Mrs. Palmer,on her baby's account.  Mrs. Jennings, who had been inclined from thefirst to think Marianne's complaint more serious than Elinor, nowlooked very grave on Mr. Harris's report, and confirming Charlotte'sfears and caution, urged the necessity of her immediate removal withher infant; and Mr. Palmer, though treating their apprehensions asidle, found the anxiety and importunity of his wife too great to bewithstood.  Her departure, therefore, was fixed on; and within an hourafter Mr. Harris's arrival, she set off, with her little boy and hisnurse, for the house of a near relation of Mr. Palmer's, who lived afew miles on the other side of Bath; whither her husband promised, ather earnest entreaty, to join her in a day or two; and whither she wasalmost equally urgent with her mother to accompany her.  Mrs. Jennings,however, with a kindness of heart which made Elinor really love her,declared her resolution of not stirring from Cleveland as long asMarianne remained ill, and of endeavouring, by her own attentive care,to supply to her the place of the mother she had taken her from; andElinor found her on every occasion a most willing and active helpmate,desirous to share in all her fatigues, and often by her betterexperience in nursing, of material use.Poor Marianne, languid and low from the nature of her malady, andfeeling herself universally ill, could no longer hope that tomorrowwould find her recovered; and the idea of what tomorrow would haveproduced, but for this unlucky illness, made every ailment severe; foron that day they were to have begun their journey home; and, attendedthe whole way by a servant of Mrs. Jennings, were to have taken theirmother by surprise on the following forenoon.  The little she said wasall in lamentation of this inevitable delay; though Elinor tried toraise her spirits, and make her believe, as she THEN really believedherself, that it would be a very short one.The next day produced little or no alteration in the state of thepatient; she certainly was not better, and, except that there was noamendment, did not appear worse.  Their party was now farther reduced;for Mr. Palmer, though very unwilling to go as well from real humanityand good-nature, as from a dislike of appearing to be frightened awayby his wife, was persuaded at last by Colonel Brandon to perform hispromise of following her; and while he was preparing to go, ColonelBrandon himself, with a much greater exertion, began to talk of goinglikewise.--Here, however, the kindness of Mrs. Jennings interposed mostacceptably; for to send the Colonel away while his love was in so muchuneasiness on her sister's account, would be to deprive them both, shethought, of every comfort; and therefore telling him at once that hisstay at Cleveland was necessary to herself, that she should want him toplay at piquet of an evening, while Miss Dashwood was above with hersister, &c. she urged him so strongly to remain, that he, who wasgratifying the first wish of his own heart by a compliance, could notlong even affect to demur; especially as Mrs. Jennings's entreaty waswarmly seconded by Mr. Palmer, who seemed to feel a relief to himself,in leaving behind him a person so well able to assist or advise MissDashwood in any emergence.Marianne was, of course, kept in ignorance of all these arrangements.She knew not that she had been the means of sending the owners ofCleveland away, in about seven days from the time of their arrival.  Itgave her no surprise that she saw nothing of Mrs. Palmer; and as itgave her likewise no concern, she never mentioned her name.Two days passed away from the time of Mr. Palmer's departure, and hersituation continued, with little variation, the same.  Mr. Harris, whoattended her every day, still talked boldly of a speedy recovery, andMiss Dashwood was equally sanguine; but the expectation of the otherswas by no means so cheerful.  Mrs. Jennings had determined very earlyin the seizure that Marianne would never get over it, and ColonelBrandon, who was chiefly of use in listening to Mrs. Jennings'sforebodings, was not in a state of mind to resist their influence.  Hetried to reason himself out of fears, which the different judgment ofthe apothecary seemed to render absurd; but the many hours of each dayin which he was left entirely alone, were but too favourable for theadmission of every melancholy idea, and he could not expel from hismind the persuasion that he should see Marianne no more.On the morning of the third day however, the gloomy anticipations ofboth were almost done away; for when Mr. Harris arrived, he declaredhis patient materially better.  Her pulse was much stronger, and everysymptom more favourable than on the preceding visit.  Elinor, confirmedin every pleasant hope, was all cheerfulness; rejoicing that in herletters to her mother, she had pursued her own judgment rather than herfriend's, in making very light of the indisposition which delayed themat Cleveland; and almost fixing on the time when Marianne would be ableto travel.But the day did not close so auspiciously as it began.-- Towards theevening Marianne became ill again, growing more heavy, restless, anduncomfortable than before.  Her sister, however, still sanguine, waswilling to attribute the change to nothing more than the fatigue ofhaving sat up to have her bed made; and carefully administering thecordials prescribed, saw her, with satisfaction, sink at last into aslumber, from which she expected the most beneficial effects.  Hersleep, though not so quiet as Elinor wished to see it, lasted aconsiderable time; and anxious to observe the result of it herself, sheresolved to sit with her during the whole of it.  Mrs. Jennings,knowing nothing of any change in the patient, went unusually early tobed; her maid, who was one of the principal nurses, was recreatingherself in the housekeeper's room, and Elinor remained alone withMarianne.The repose of the latter became more and more disturbed; and hersister, who watched, with unremitting attention her continual change ofposture, and heard the frequent but inarticulate sounds of complaintwhich passed her lips, was almost wishing to rouse her from so painfula slumber, when Marianne, suddenly awakened by some accidental noise inthe house, started hastily up, and, with feverish wildness, cried out,--"Is mama coming?--""Not yet," cried the other, concealing her terror, and assistingMarianne to lie down again, "but she will be here, I hope, before it islong.  It is a great way, you know, from hence to Barton.""But she must not go round by London," cried Marianne, in the samehurried manner.  "I shall never see her, if she goes by London."Elinor perceived with alarm that she was not quite herself, and, whileattempting to soothe her, eagerly felt her pulse.  It was lower andquicker than ever!  and Marianne, still talking wildly of mama, heralarm increased so rapidly, as to determine her on sending instantlyfor Mr. Harris, and despatching a messenger to Barton for her mother.To consult with Colonel Brandon on the best means of effecting thelatter, was a thought which immediately followed the resolution of itsperformance; and as soon she had rung up the maid to take her place byher sister, she hastened down to the drawing-room, where she knew hewas generally to be found at a much later hour than the present.It was no time for hesitation.  Her fears and her difficulties wereimmediately before him.  Her fears, he had no courage, no confidence toattempt the removal of:--he listened to them in silent despondence;--buther difficulties were instantly obviated, for with a readiness thatseemed to speak the occasion, and the service pre-arranged in his mind,he offered himself as the messenger who should fetch Mrs. Dashwood.Elinor made no resistance that was not easily overcome. She thanked himwith brief, though fervent gratitude, and while he went to hurry off hisservant with a message to Mr. Harris, and an order for post-horsesdirectly, she wrote a few lines to her mother.The comfort of such a friend at that moment as Colonel Brandon--or sucha companion for her mother,--how gratefully was it felt!--a companionwhose judgment would guide, whose attendance must relieve, and whosefriendship might soothe her!--as far as the shock of such a summonsCOULD be lessened to her, his presence, his manners, his assistance,would lessen it.HE, meanwhile, whatever he might feel, acted with all the firmness of acollected mind, made every necessary arrangement with the utmostdespatch, and calculated with exactness the time in which she mightlook for his return.  Not a moment was lost in delay of any kind.  Thehorses arrived, even before they were expected, and Colonel Brandononly pressing her hand with a look of solemnity, and a few words spokentoo low to reach her ear, hurried into the carriage.  It was then abouttwelve o'clock, and she returned to her sister's apartment to wait forthe arrival of the apothecary, and to watch by her the rest of thenight.  It was a night of almost equal suffering to both.  Hour afterhour passed away in sleepless pain and delirium on Marianne's side, andin the most cruel anxiety on Elinor's, before Mr. Harris appeared.  Herapprehensions once raised, paid by their excess for all her formersecurity; and the servant who sat up with her, for she would not allowMrs. Jennings to be called, only tortured her more, by hints of whather mistress had always thought.Marianne's ideas were still, at intervals, fixed incoherently on hermother, and whenever she mentioned her name, it gave a pang to theheart of poor Elinor, who, reproaching herself for having trifled withso many days of illness, and wretched for some immediate relief,fancied that all relief might soon be in vain, that every thing hadbeen delayed too long, and pictured to herself her suffering motherarriving too late to see this darling child, or to see her rational.She was on the point of sending again for Mr. Harris, or if HE couldnot come, for some other advice, when the former--but not till afterfive o'clock--arrived.  His opinion, however, made some little amendsfor his delay, for though acknowledging a very unexpected andunpleasant alteration in his patient, he would not allow the danger tobe material, and talked of the relief which a fresh mode of treatmentmust procure, with a confidence which, in a lesser degree, wascommunicated to Elinor.  He promised to call again in the course ofthree or four hours, and left both the patient and her anxiousattendant more composed than he had found them.With strong concern, and with many reproaches for not being called totheir aid, did Mrs. Jennings hear in the morning of what had passed.Her former apprehensions, now with greater reason restored, left her nodoubt of the event; and though trying to speak comfort to Elinor, herconviction of her sister's danger would not allow her to offer thecomfort of hope.  Her heart was really grieved.  The rapid decay, theearly death of a girl so young, so lovely as Marianne, must have strucka less interested person with concern.  On Mrs. Jennings's compassionshe had other claims.  She had been for three months her companion, wasstill under her care, and she was known to have been greatly injured,and long unhappy.  The distress of her sister too, particularly afavourite, was before her;--and as for their mother, when Mrs. Jenningsconsidered that Marianne might probably be to HER what Charlotte was toherself, her sympathy in HER sufferings was very sincere.Mr. Harris was punctual in his second visit;--but he came to bedisappointed in his hopes of what the last would produce.  Hismedicines had failed;--the fever was unabated; and Marianne only morequiet--not more herself--remained in a heavy stupor.  Elinor, catchingall, and more than all, his fears in a moment, proposed to call infurther advice.  But he judged it unnecessary: he had still somethingmore to try, some more fresh application, of whose success he was asconfident as the last, and his visit concluded with encouragingassurances which reached the ear, but could not enter the heart of MissDashwood.  She was calm, except when she thought of her mother; but shewas almost hopeless; and in this state she continued till noon,scarcely stirring from her sister's bed, her thoughts wandering fromone image of grief, one suffering friend to another, and her spiritsoppressed to the utmost by the conversation of Mrs. Jennings, whoscrupled not to attribute the severity and danger of this attack to themany weeks of previous indisposition which Marianne's disappointmenthad brought on.  Elinor felt all the reasonableness of the idea, and itgave fresh misery to her reflections.About noon, however, she began--but with a caution--a dread ofdisappointment which for some time kept her silent, even to herfriend--to fancy, to hope she could perceive a slight amendment in hersister's pulse;--she waited, watched, and examined it again andagain;--and at last, with an agitation more difficult to bury underexterior calmness, than all her foregoing distress, ventured tocommunicate her hopes.  Mrs. Jennings, though forced, on examination,to acknowledge a temporary revival, tried to keep her young friend fromindulging a thought of its continuance;--and Elinor, conning over everyinjunction of distrust, told herself likewise not to hope.  But it wastoo late.  Hope had already entered; and feeling all its anxiousflutter, she bent over her sister to watch--she hardly knew for what.Half an hour passed away, and the favourable symptom yet blessed her.Others even arose to confirm it.  Her breath, her skin, her lips, allflattered Elinor with signs of amendment; and Marianne fixed her eyeson her with a rational, though languid, gaze.  Anxiety and hope nowoppressed her in equal degrees, and left her no moment of tranquillitytill the arrival of Mr. Harris at four o'clock;--when his assurances,his felicitations on a recovery in her sister even surpassing hisexpectation, gave her confidence, comfort, and tears of joy.Marianne was in every respect materially better, and he declared herentirely out of danger.  Mrs. Jennings, perhaps satisfied with thepartial justification of her forebodings which had been found in theirlate alarm, allowed herself to trust in his judgment, and admitted,with unfeigned joy, and soon with unequivocal cheerfulness, theprobability of an entire recovery.Elinor could not be cheerful.  Her joy was of a different kind, and ledto any thing rather than to gaiety.  Marianne restored to life, health,friends, and to her doting mother, was an idea to fill her heart withsensations of exquisite comfort, and expand it in ferventgratitude;--but it led to no outward demonstrations of joy, no words,no smiles.  All within Elinor's breast was satisfaction, silent andstrong.She continued by the side of her sister, with little intermission thewhole afternoon, calming every fear, satisfying every inquiry of herenfeebled spirits, supplying every succour, and watching almost everylook and every breath.  The possibility of a relapse would of course,in some moments, occur to remind her of what anxiety was--but when shesaw, on her frequent and minute examination, that every symptom ofrecovery continued, and saw Marianne at six o'clock sink into a quiet,steady, and to all appearance comfortable, sleep, she silenced everydoubt.The time was now drawing on, when Colonel Brandon might be expectedback.  At ten o'clock, she trusted, or at least not much later hermother would be relieved from the dreadful suspense in which she mustnow be travelling towards them.  The Colonel, too!--perhaps scarcelyless an object of pity!--Oh!--how slow was the progress of time whichyet kept them in ignorance!At seven o'clock, leaving Marianne still sweetly asleep, she joinedMrs. Jennings in the drawing-room to tea.  Of breakfast she had beenkept by her fears, and of dinner by their sudden reverse, from eatingmuch;--and the present refreshment, therefore, with such feelings ofcontent as she brought to it, was particularly welcome.  Mrs. Jenningswould have persuaded her, at its conclusion, to take some rest beforeher mother's arrival, and allow HER to take her place by Marianne; butElinor had no sense of fatigue, no capability of sleep at that momentabout her, and she was not to be kept away from her sister anunnecessary instant.  Mrs. Jennings therefore attending her up stairsinto the sick chamber, to satisfy herself that all continued right,left her there again to her charge and her thoughts, and retired to herown room to write letters and sleep.The night was cold and stormy.  The wind roared round the house, andthe rain beat against the windows; but Elinor, all happiness within,regarded it not.  Marianne slept through every blast; and thetravellers--they had a rich reward in store, for every presentinconvenience.The clock struck eight.  Had it been ten, Elinor would have beenconvinced that at that moment she heard a carriage driving up to thehouse; and so strong was the persuasion that she DID, in spite of theALMOST impossibility of their being already come, that she moved intothe adjoining dressing-closet and opened a window shutter, to besatisfied of the truth.  She instantly saw that her ears had notdeceived her.  The flaring lamps of a carriage were immediately inview.  By their uncertain light she thought she could discern it to bedrawn by four horses; and this, while it told the excess of her poormother's alarm, gave some explanation to such unexpected rapidity.Never in her life had Elinor found it so difficult to be calm, as atthat moment.  The knowledge of what her mother must be feeling as thecarriage stopt at the door--of her doubt--her dread--perhaps herdespair!--and of what SHE had to tell!--with such knowledge it wasimpossible to be calm.  All that remained to be done was to be speedy;and, therefore staying only till she could leave Mrs. Jennings's maidwith her sister, she hurried down stairs.The bustle in the vestibule, as she passed along an inner lobby,assured her that they were already in the house.  She rushed to thedrawing-room,--she entered it,--and saw only Willoughby.Elinor, starting back with a look of horror at the sight of him, obeyedthe first impulse of her heart in turning instantly to quit the room,and her hand was already on the lock, when its action was suspended byhis hastily advancing, and saying, in a voice rather of command thansupplication,"Miss Dashwood, for half an hour--for ten minutes--I entreat you tostay.""No, sir," she replied with firmness, "I shall NOT stay.  Your businesscannot be with ME.  The servants, I suppose, forgot to tell you thatMr. Palmer was not in the house.""Had they told me," he cried with vehemence, "that Mr. Palmer and allhis relations were at the devil, it would not have turned me from thedoor.  My business is with you, and only you.""With me!"--in the utmost amazement--"well, sir,--be quick--and if youcan--less violent.""Sit down, and I will be both."She hesitated; she knew not what to do.  The possibility of ColonelBrandon's arriving and finding her there, came across her.  But she hadpromised to hear him, and her curiosity no less than her honor wasengaged.  After a moment's recollection, therefore, concluding thatprudence required dispatch, and that her acquiescence would bestpromote it, she walked silently towards the table, and sat down.  Hetook the opposite chair, and for half a minute not a word was said byeither."Pray be quick, sir,"--said Elinor, impatiently;--"I have no time tospare."He was sitting in an attitude of deep meditation, and seemed not tohear her."Your sister," said he, with abruptness, a moment afterwards--"is outof danger.  I heard it from the servant.  God be praised!--But is ittrue? is it really true?"Elinor would not speak.  He repeated the inquiry with yet greatereagerness."For God's sake tell me, is she out of danger, or is she not?""We hope she is."He rose up, and walked across the room."Had I known as much half an hour ago--But since I AM here,"--speakingwith a forced vivacity as he returned to his seat--"what does itsignify?--For once, Miss Dashwood--it will be the last time,perhaps--let us be cheerful together.--I am in a fine mood forgaiety.-- Tell me honestly"--a deeper glow overspreading hischeeks--"do you think me most a knave or a fool?"Elinor looked at him with greater astonishment than ever.  She began tothink that he must be in liquor;--the strangeness of such a visit, andof such manners, seemed no otherwise intelligible; and with thisimpression she immediately rose, saying,"Mr. Willoughby, I advise you at present to return to Combe--I am notat leisure to remain with you longer.-- Whatever your business may bewith me, it will be better recollected and explained to-morrow.""I understand you," he replied, with an expressive smile, and a voiceperfectly calm; "yes, I am very drunk.-- A pint of porter with my coldbeef at Marlborough was enough to over-set me.""At Marlborough!"--cried Elinor, more and more at a loss to understandwhat he would be at."Yes,--I left London this morning at eight o'clock, and the only tenminutes I have spent out of my chaise since that time procured me anuncheon at Marlborough."The steadiness of his manner, and the intelligence of his eye as hespoke, convincing Elinor, that whatever other unpardonable folly mightbring him to Cleveland, he was not brought there by intoxication, shesaid, after a moment's recollection,"Mr. Willoughby, you OUGHT to feel, and I certainly DO--that after whathas passed--your coming here in this manner, and forcing yourself uponmy notice, requires a very particular excuse.--What is it, that youmean by it?"--"I mean,"--said he, with serious energy--"if I can, to make you hate meone degree less than you do NOW.  I mean to offer some kind ofexplanation, some kind of apology, for the past; to open my whole heartto you, and by convincing you, that though I have been always ablockhead, I have not been always a rascal, to obtain something likeforgiveness from Ma--from your sister.""Is this the real reason of your coming?""Upon my soul it is,"--was his answer, with a warmth which brought allthe former Willoughby to her remembrance, and in spite of herself madeher think him sincere."If that is all, you may be satisfied already,--for Marianne DOES--shehas LONG forgiven you.""Has she?"--he cried, in the same eager tone.-- "Then she has forgivenme before she ought to have done it.  But she shall forgive me again,and on more reasonable grounds.--NOW will you listen to me?"Elinor bowed her assent."I do not know," said he, after a pause of expectation on her side, andthoughtfulness on his own,--"how YOU may have accounted for mybehaviour to your sister, or what diabolical motive you may haveimputed to me.-- Perhaps you will hardly think the better of me,--it isworth the trial however, and you shall hear every thing.  When I firstbecame intimate in your family, I had no other intention, no other viewin the acquaintance than to pass my time pleasantly while I was obligedto remain in Devonshire, more pleasantly than I had ever done before.Your sister's lovely person and interesting manners could not butplease me; and her behaviour to me almost from the first, was of akind--It is astonishing, when I reflect on what it was, and what SHEwas, that my heart should have been so insensible!  But at first I mustconfess, my vanity only was elevated by it.  Careless of her happiness,thinking only of my own amusement, giving way to feelings which I hadalways been too much in the habit of indulging, I endeavoured, by everymeans in my power, to make myself pleasing to her, without any designof returning her affection."Miss Dashwood, at this point, turning her eyes on him with the mostangry contempt, stopped him, by saying,"It is hardly worth while, Mr. Willoughby, for you to relate, or for meto listen any longer.  Such a beginning as this cannot be followed byany thing.-- Do not let me be pained by hearing any thing more on thesubject.""I insist on you hearing the whole of it," he replied, "My fortune wasnever large, and I had always been expensive, always in the habit ofassociating with people of better income than myself.  Every year sincemy coming of age, or even before, I believe, had added to my debts; andthough the death of my old cousin, Mrs. Smith, was to set me free; yetthat event being uncertain, and possibly far distant, it had been forsome time my intention to re-establish my circumstances by marrying awoman of fortune.  To attach myself to your sister, therefore, was nota thing to be thought of;--and with a meanness, selfishness,cruelty--which no indignant, no contemptuous look, even of yours, MissDashwood, can ever reprobate too much--I was acting in this manner,trying to engage her regard, without a thought of returning it.--Butone thing may be said for me: even in that horrid state of selfishvanity, I did not know the extent of the injury I meditated, because Idid not THEN know what it was to love.  But have I ever known it?--Wellmay it be doubted; for, had I really loved, could I have sacrificed myfeelings to vanity, to avarice?--or, what is more, could I havesacrificed hers?-- But I have done it.  To avoid a comparative poverty,which her affection and her society would have deprived of all itshorrors, I have, by raising myself to affluence, lost every thing thatcould make it a blessing.""You did then," said Elinor, a little softened, "believe yourself atone time attached to her?""To have resisted such attractions, to have withstood suchtenderness!--Is there a man on earth who could have done it?--Yes, Ifound myself, by insensible degrees, sincerely fond of her; and thehappiest hours of my life were what I spent with her when I felt myintentions were strictly honourable, and my feelings blameless.  EvenTHEN, however, when fully determined on paying my addresses to her, Iallowed myself most improperly to put off, from day to day, the momentof doing it, from an unwillingness to enter into an engagement while mycircumstances were so greatly embarrassed.  I will not reason here--norwill I stop for YOU to expatiate on the absurdity, and the worse thanabsurdity, of scrupling to engage my faith where my honour was alreadybound.  The event has proved, that I was a cunning fool, providing withgreat circumspection for a possible opportunity of making myselfcontemptible and wretched for ever.  At last, however, my resolutionwas taken, and I had determined, as soon as I could engage her alone,to justify the attentions I had so invariably paid her, and openlyassure her of an affection which I had already taken such pains todisplay.  But in the interim--in the interim of the very few hours thatwere to pass, before I could have an opportunity of speaking with herin private--a circumstance occurred--an unlucky circumstance, to ruinall my resolution, and with it all my comfort.  A discovery tookplace,"--here he hesitated and looked down.--"Mrs. Smith had somehow orother been informed, I imagine by some distant relation, whose interestit was to deprive me of her favour, of an affair, a connection--but Ineed not explain myself farther," he added, looking at her with anheightened colour and an enquiring eye--"your particular intimacy--youhave probably heard the whole story long ago.""I have," returned Elinor, colouring likewise, and hardening her heartanew against any compassion for him, "I have heard it all.  And how youwill explain away any part of your guilt in that dreadful business, Iconfess is beyond my comprehension.""Remember," cried Willoughby, "from whom you received the account.Could it be an impartial one?  I acknowledge that her situation and hercharacter ought to have been respected by me.  I do not mean to justifymyself, but at the same time cannot leave you to suppose that I havenothing to urge--that because she was injured she was irreproachable,and because I was a libertine, SHE must be a saint.  If the violence ofher passions, the weakness of her understanding--I do not mean,however, to defend myself.  Her affection for me deserved bettertreatment, and I often, with great self-reproach, recall the tendernesswhich, for a very short time, had the power of creating any return.  Iwish--I heartily wish it had never been.  But I have injured more thanherself; and I have injured one, whose affection for me--(may I sayit?) was scarcely less warm than hers; and whose mind--Oh! howinfinitely superior!"--"Your indifference, however, towards that unfortunate girl--I must sayit, unpleasant to me as the discussion of such a subject may wellbe--your indifference is no apology for your cruel neglect of her.  Donot think yourself excused by any weakness, any natural defect ofunderstanding on her side, in the wanton cruelty so evident on yours.You must have known, that while you were enjoying yourself inDevonshire pursuing fresh schemes, always gay, always happy, she wasreduced to the extremest indigence.""But, upon my soul, I did NOT know it," he warmly replied; "I did notrecollect that I had omitted to give her my direction; and common sensemight have told her how to find it out.""Well, sir, and what said Mrs. Smith?""She taxed me with the offence at once, and my confusion may beguessed.  The purity of her life, the formality of her notions, herignorance of the world--every thing was against me.  The matter itselfI could not deny, and vain was every endeavour to soften it.  She waspreviously disposed, I believe, to doubt the morality of my conduct ingeneral, and was moreover discontented with the very little attention,the very little portion of my time that I had bestowed on her, in mypresent visit.  In short, it ended in a total breach.  By one measure Imight have saved myself.  In the height of her morality, good woman!she offered to forgive the past, if I would marry Eliza.  That couldnot be--and I was formally dismissed from her favour and her house.The night following this affair--I was to go the next morning--wasspent by me in deliberating on what my future conduct should be.  Thestruggle was great--but it ended too soon.  My affection for Marianne,my thorough conviction of her attachment to me--it was all insufficientto outweigh that dread of poverty, or get the better of those falseideas of the necessity of riches, which I was naturally inclined tofeel, and expensive society had increased.  I had reason to believemyself secure of my present wife, if I chose to address her, and Ipersuaded myself to think that nothing else in common prudence remainedfor me to do.  A heavy scene however awaited me, before I could leaveDevonshire;--I was engaged to dine with you on that very day; someapology was therefore necessary for my breaking this engagement.  Butwhether I should write this apology, or deliver it in person, was apoint of long debate.  To see Marianne, I felt, would be dreadful, andI even doubted whether I could see her again, and keep to myresolution.  In that point, however, I undervalued my own magnanimity,as the event declared; for I went, I saw her, and saw her miserable,and left her miserable--and left her hoping never to see her again.""Why did you call, Mr. Willoughby?" said Elinor, reproachfully; "a notewould have answered every purpose.-- Why was it necessary to call?""It was necessary to my own pride.  I could not bear to leave thecountry in a manner that might lead you, or the rest of theneighbourhood, to suspect any part of what had really passed betweenMrs. Smith and myself--and I resolved therefore on calling at thecottage, in my way to Honiton.  The sight of your dear sister, however,was really dreadful; and, to heighten the matter, I found her alone.You were all gone I do not know where.  I had left her only the eveningbefore, so fully, so firmly resolved within my self on doing right!  Afew hours were to have engaged her to me for ever; and I remember howhappy, how gay were my spirits, as I walked from the cottage toAllenham, satisfied with myself, delighted with every body!  But inthis, our last interview of friendship, I approached her with a senseof guilt that almost took from me the power of dissembling.  Hersorrow, her disappointment, her deep regret, when I told her that I wasobliged to leave Devonshire so immediately--I never shall forgetit--united too with such reliance, such confidence in me!--Oh,God!--what a hard-hearted rascal I was!"They were both silent for a few moments.  Elinor first spoke."Did you tell her that you should soon return?""I do not know what I told her," he replied, impatiently; "less thanwas due to the past, beyond a doubt, and in all likelihood much morethan was justified by the future.  I cannot think of it.--It won'tdo.--Then came your dear mother to torture me farther, with all herkindness and confidence.  Thank Heaven! it DID torture me.  I wasmiserable.  Miss Dashwood, you cannot have an idea of the comfort itgives me to look back on my own misery.  I owe such a grudge to myselffor the stupid, rascally folly of my own heart, that all my pastsufferings under it are only triumph and exultation to me now.  Well, Iwent, left all that I loved, and went to those to whom, at best, I wasonly indifferent.  My journey to town--travelling with my own horses,and therefore so tediously--no creature to speak to--my own reflectionsso cheerful--when I looked forward every thing so inviting!--when Ilooked back at Barton, the picture so soothing!--oh, it was a blessedjourney!"He stopped."Well, sir," said Elinor, who, though pitying him, grew impatient forhis departure, "and this is all?""Ah!--no,--have you forgot what passed in town?-- That infamousletter--Did she shew it you?""Yes, I saw every note that passed.""When the first of hers reached me (as it immediately did, for I was intown the whole time,) what I felt is--in the common phrase, not to beexpressed; in a more simple one--perhaps too simple to raise anyemotion--my feelings were very, very painful.--Every line, every wordwas--in the hackneyed metaphor which their dear writer, were she here,would forbid--a dagger to my heart.  To know that Marianne was in townwas--in the same language--a thunderbolt.--Thunderbolts anddaggers!--what a reproof would she have given me!--her taste, heropinions--I believe they are better known to me than my own,--and I amsure they are dearer."Elinor's heart, which had undergone many changes in the course of thisextraordinary conversation, was now softened again;--yet she felt ither duty to check such ideas in her companion as the last."This is not right, Mr. Willoughby.--Remember that you are married.Relate only what in your conscience you think necessary for me to hear.""Marianne's note, by assuring me that I was still as dear to her as informer days, that in spite of the many, many weeks we had beenseparated, she was as constant in her own feelings, and as full offaith in the constancy of mine as ever, awakened all my remorse.  I sayawakened, because time and London, business and dissipation, had insome measure quieted it, and I had been growing a fine hardenedvillain, fancying myself indifferent to her, and chusing to fancy thatshe too must have become indifferent to me; talking to myself of ourpast attachment as a mere idle, trifling business, shrugging up myshoulders in proof of its being so, and silencing every reproach,overcoming every scruple, by secretly saying now and then, 'I shall beheartily glad to hear she is well married.'-- But this note made meknow myself better.  I felt that she was infinitely dearer to me thanany other woman in the world, and that I was using her infamously.  Butevery thing was then just settled between Miss Grey and me.  To retreatwas impossible.  All that I had to do, was to avoid you both.  I sentno answer to Marianne, intending by that to preserve myself from herfarther notice; and for some time I was even determined not to call inBerkeley Street;--but at last, judging it wiser to affect the air of acool, common acquaintance than anything else, I watched you all safelyout of the house one morning, and left my name.""Watched us out of the house!""Even so.  You would be surprised to hear how often I watched you, howoften I was on the point of falling in with you.  I have entered many ashop to avoid your sight, as the carriage drove by.  Lodging as I didin Bond Street, there was hardly a day in which I did not catch aglimpse of one or other of you; and nothing but the most constantwatchfulness on my side, a most invariably prevailing desire to keepout of your sight, could have separated us so long.  I avoided theMiddletons as much as possible, as well as everybody else who waslikely to prove an acquaintance in common.  Not aware of their being intown, however, I blundered on Sir John, I believe, the first day of hiscoming, and the day after I had called at Mrs. Jennings's.  He asked meto a party, a dance at his house in the evening.--Had he NOT told me asan inducement that you and your sister were to be there, I should havefelt it too certain a thing, to trust myself near him.  The nextmorning brought another short note from Marianne--still affectionate,open, artless, confiding--everything that could make MY conduct mosthateful.  I could not answer it.  I tried--but could not frame asentence.  But I thought of her, I believe, every moment of the day.If you CAN pity me, Miss Dashwood, pity my situation as it was THEN.With my head and heart full of your sister, I was forced to play thehappy lover to another woman!--Those three or four weeks were worsethan all.  Well, at last, as I need not tell you, you were forced onme; and what a sweet figure I cut!--what an evening of agony it was!--Marianne, beautiful as an angel on one side, calling me Willoughby insuch a tone!--Oh, God!--holding out her hand to me, asking me for anexplanation, with those bewitching eyes fixed in such speakingsolicitude on my face!--and Sophia, jealous as the devil on the otherhand, looking all that was--Well, it does not signify; it is overnow.-- Such an evening!--I ran away from you all as soon as I could;but not before I had seen Marianne's sweet face as white asdeath.--THAT was the last, last look I ever had of her;--the lastmanner in which she appeared to me.  It was a horrid sight!--yet when Ithought of her to-day as really dying, it was a kind of comfort to meto imagine that I knew exactly how she would appear to those, who sawher last in this world.  She was before me, constantly before me, as Itravelled, in the same look and hue."A short pause of mutual thoughtfulness succeeded.  Willoughby firstrousing himself, broke it thus:"Well, let me make haste and be gone.  Your sister is certainly better,certainly out of danger?""We are assured of it.""Your poor mother, too!--doting on Marianne.""But the letter, Mr. Willoughby, your own letter; have you any thing tosay about that?""Yes, yes, THAT in particular.  Your sister wrote to me again, youknow, the very next morning.  You saw what she said.  I wasbreakfasting at the Ellisons,--and her letter, with some others, wasbrought to me there from my lodgings.  It happened to catch Sophia'seye before it caught mine--and its size, the elegance of the paper, thehand-writing altogether, immediately gave her a suspicion.  Some vaguereport had reached her before of my attachment to some young lady inDevonshire, and what had passed within her observation the precedingevening had marked who the young lady was, and made her more jealousthan ever.  Affecting that air of playfulness, therefore, which isdelightful in a woman one loves, she opened the letter directly,and read its contents.  She was well paid for her impudence.She read what made her wretched.  Her wretchedness I could haveborne, but her passion--her malice--At all events it must be appeased.And, in short--what do you think of my wife's style ofletter-writing?--delicate--tender--truly feminine--was it not?""Your wife!--The letter was in your own hand-writing.""Yes, but I had only the credit of servilely copying such sentences asI was ashamed to put my name to.  The original was all her own--her ownhappy thoughts and gentle diction.  But what could I do!--we wereengaged, every thing in preparation, the day almost fixed--But I amtalking like a fool.  Preparation!--day!--In honest words, her moneywas necessary to me, and in a situation like mine, any thing was to bedone to prevent a rupture.  And after all, what did it signify to mycharacter in the opinion of Marianne and her friends, in what languagemy answer was couched?--It must have been only to one end.  My businesswas to declare myself a scoundrel, and whether I did it with a bow or abluster was of little importance.-- 'I am ruined for ever in theiropinion--' said I to myself--'I am shut out for ever from theirsociety, they already think me an unprincipled fellow, this letter willonly make them think me a blackguard one.' Such were my reasonings, as,in a sort of desperate carelessness, I copied my wife's words, andparted with the last relics of Marianne.  Her three notes--unluckilythey were all in my pocketbook, or I should have denied theirexistence, and hoarded them for ever--I was forced to put them up, andcould not even kiss them.  And the lock of hair--that too I had alwayscarried about me in the same pocket-book, which was now searched byMadam with the most ingratiating virulence,--the dear lock--all, everymemento was torn from me.""You are very wrong, Mr. Willoughby, very blamable," said Elinor, whileher voice, in spite of herself, betrayed her compassionate emotion;"you ought not to speak in this way, either of Mrs. Willoughby or mysister.  You had made your own choice.  It was not forced on you.  Yourwife has a claim to your politeness, to your respect, at least.  Shemust be attached to you, or she would not have married you.  To treather with unkindness, to speak of her slightingly is no atonement toMarianne--nor can I suppose it a relief to your own conscience.""Do not talk to me of my wife," said he with a heavy sigh.-- "She doesnot deserve your compassion.--She knew I had no regard for her when wemarried.--Well, married we were, and came down to Combe Magna to behappy, and afterwards returned to town to be gay.--And now do you pityme, Miss Dashwood?--or have I said all this to no purpose?-- Am I--beit only one degree--am I less guilty in your opinion than I wasbefore?--My intentions were not always wrong.  Have I explained awayany part of my guilt?""Yes, you have certainly removed something--a little.-- You have provedyourself, on the whole, less faulty than I had believed you.  You haveproved your heart less wicked, much less wicked.  But I hardlyknow--the misery that you have inflicted--I hardly know what could havemade it worse.""Will you repeat to your sister when she is recovered, what I have beentelling you?--Let me be a little lightened too in her opinion as wellas in yours.  You tell me that she has forgiven me already.  Let me beable to fancy that a better knowledge of my heart, and of my presentfeelings, will draw from her a more spontaneous, more natural, moregentle, less dignified, forgiveness.  Tell her of my misery and mypenitence--tell her that my heart was never inconstant to her, and ifyou will, that at this moment she is dearer to me than ever.""I will tell her all that is necessary to what may comparatively becalled, your justification.  But you have not explained to me theparticular reason of your coming now, nor how you heard of her illness.""Last night, in Drury Lane lobby, I ran against Sir John Middleton, andwhen he saw who I was--for the first time these two months--he spoke tome.--That he had cut me ever since my marriage, I had seen withoutsurprise or resentment.  Now, however, his good-natured, honest, stupidsoul, full of indignation against me, and concern for your sister,could not resist the temptation of telling me what he knew oughtto--though probably he did not think it WOULD--vex me horridly.  Asbluntly as he could speak it, therefore, he told me that MarianneDashwood was dying of a putrid fever at Cleveland--a letter thatmorning received from Mrs. Jennings declared her danger mostimminent--the Palmers are all gone off in a fright, &c.--I was too muchshocked to be able to pass myself off as insensible even to theundiscerning Sir John.  His heart was softened in seeing mine suffer;and so much of his ill-will was done away, that when we parted, healmost shook me by the hand while he reminded me of an old promiseabout a pointer puppy.  What I felt on hearing that your sister wasdying--and dying too, believing me the greatest villain upon earth,scorning, hating me in her latest moments--for how could I tell whathorrid projects might not have been imputed?  ONE person I was surewould represent me as capable of any thing-- What I felt wasdreadful!--My resolution was soon made, and at eight o'clock thismorning I was in my carriage.  Now you know all."Elinor made no answer.  Her thoughts were silently fixed on theirreparable injury which too early an independence and its consequenthabits of idleness, dissipation, and luxury, had made in the mind, thecharacter, the happiness, of a man who, to every advantage of personand talents, united a disposition naturally open and honest, and afeeling, affectionate temper.  The world had made him extravagant andvain--Extravagance and vanity had made him cold-hearted and selfish.Vanity, while seeking its own guilty triumph at the expense of another,had involved him in a real attachment, which extravagance, or at leastits offspring, necessity, had required to be sacrificed.  Each faultypropensity in leading him to evil, had led him likewise to punishment.The attachment, from which against honour, against feeling, againstevery better interest he had outwardly torn himself, now, when nolonger allowable, governed every thought; and the connection, for thesake of which he had, with little scruple, left her sister to misery,was likely to prove a source of unhappiness to himself of a far moreincurable nature.  From a reverie of this kind she was recalled at theend of some minutes by Willoughby, who, rousing himself from a reverieat least equally painful, started up in preparation for going, andsaid--"There is no use in staying here; I must be off.""Are you going back to town?""No--to Combe Magna.  I have business there; from thence to town in aday or two.  Good bye."He held out his hand.  She could not refuse to give him hers;--hepressed it with affection."And you DO think something better of me than you did?"--said he,letting it fall, and leaning against the mantel-piece as if forgettinghe was to go.Elinor assured him that she did;--that she forgave, pitied, wished himwell--was even interested in his happiness--and added some gentlecounsel as to the behaviour most likely to promote it.  His answer wasnot very encouraging."As to that," said he, "I must rub through the world as well as I can.Domestic happiness is out of the question.  If, however, I am allowedto think that you and yours feel an interest in my fate and actions, itmay be the means--it may put me on my guard--at least, it may besomething to live for.  Marianne to be sure is lost to me for ever.Were I even by any blessed chance at liberty again--"Elinor stopped him with a reproof."Well,"--he replied--"once more good bye. I shall now go away and livein dread of one event.""What do you mean?""Your sister's marriage.""You are very wrong.  She can never be more lost to you than she isnow.""But she will be gained by some one else.  And if that some one shouldbe the very he whom, of all others, I could least bear--but I will notstay to rob myself of all your compassionate goodwill, by shewing thatwhere I have most injured I can least forgive.  Good bye,--God blessyou!"And with these words, he almost ran out of the room.Elinor, for some time after he left her, for some time even after thesound of his carriage had died away, remained too much oppressed by acrowd of ideas, widely differing in themselves, but of which sadnesswas the general result, to think even of her sister.Willoughby, he, whom only half an hour ago she had abhorred as the mostworthless of men, Willoughby, in spite of all his faults, excited adegree of commiseration for the sufferings produced by them, which madeher think of him as now separated for ever from her family, with atenderness, a regret, rather in proportion, as she soon acknowledgedwithin herself--to his wishes than to his merits.  She felt that hisinfluence over her mind was heightened by circumstances which ought notin reason to have weight; by that person of uncommon attraction, thatopen, affectionate, and lively manner which it was no merit to possess;and by that still ardent love for Marianne, which it was not eveninnocent to indulge.  But she felt that it was so, long, long beforeshe could feel his influence less.When at last she returned to the unconscious Marianne, she found herjust awaking, refreshed by so long and sweet a sleep to the extent ofher hopes.  Elinor's heart was full.  The past, the present, thefuture, Willoughby's visit, Marianne's safety, and her mother'sexpected arrival, threw her altogether into an agitation of spiritswhich kept off every indication of fatigue, and made her only fearfulof betraying herself to her sister.  Short was the time, however, inwhich that fear could affect her, for within half an hour afterWilloughby's leaving the house, she was again called down stairs by thesound of another carriage.--Eager to save her mother from everyunnecessary moment's horrible suspense, she ran immediately into thehall, and reached the outward door just in time to receive and supporther as she entered it.Mrs. Dashwood, whose terror as they drew near the house had producedalmost the conviction of Marianne's being no more, had no voice toinquire after her, no voice even for Elinor; but SHE, waiting neitherfor salutation nor inquiry, instantly gave the joyful relief;--and hermother, catching it with all her usual warmth, was in a moment as muchovercome by her happiness, as she had been before by her fears.  Shewas supported into the drawing-room between her daughter and herfriend;--and there, shedding tears of joy, though still unable tospeak, embraced Elinor again and again, turning from her at intervalsto press Colonel Brandon's hand, with a look which spoke at once hergratitude, and her conviction of his sharing with herself in the blissof the moment.  He shared it, however, in a silence even greater thanher own.As soon as Mrs. Dashwood had recovered herself, to see Marianne was herfirst desire; and in two minutes she was with her beloved child,rendered dearer to her than ever by absence, unhappiness, and danger.Elinor's delight, as she saw what each felt in the meeting, was onlychecked by an apprehension of its robbing Marianne of farthersleep;--but Mrs. Dashwood could be calm, could be even prudent, whenthe life of a child was at stake, and Marianne, satisfied in knowingher mother was near her, and conscious of being too weak forconversation, submitted readily to the silence and quiet prescribed byevery nurse around her.  Mrs. Dashwood WOULD sit up with her all night;and Elinor, in compliance with her mother's entreaty, went to bed.  Butthe rest, which one night entirely sleepless, and many hours of themost wearing anxiety seemed to make requisite, was kept off byirritation of spirits.  Willoughby, "poor Willoughby," as she nowallowed herself to call him, was constantly in her thoughts; she wouldnot but have heard his vindication for the world, and now blamed, nowacquitted herself for having judged him so harshly before.  But herpromise of relating it to her sister was invariably painful.  Shedreaded the performance of it, dreaded what its effect on Mariannemight be; doubted whether after such an explanation she could ever behappy with another; and for a moment wished Willoughby a widower.Then, remembering Colonel Brandon, reproved herself, felt that to HISsufferings and his constancy far more than to his rival's, the rewardof her sister was due, and wished any thing rather than Mrs.Willoughby's death.The shock of Colonel Brandon's errand at Barton had been much softenedto Mrs. Dashwood by her own previous alarm; for so great was heruneasiness about Marianne, that she had already determined to set outfor Cleveland on that very day, without waiting for any furtherintelligence, and had so far settled her journey before his arrival,that the Careys were then expected every moment to fetch Margaret away,as her mother was unwilling to take her where there might be infection.Marianne continued to mend every day, and the brilliant cheerfulness ofMrs. Dashwood's looks and spirits proved her to be, as she repeatedlydeclared herself, one of the happiest women in the world.  Elinor couldnot hear the declaration, nor witness its proofs without sometimeswondering whether her mother ever recollected Edward.  But Mrs.Dashwood, trusting to the temperate account of her own disappointmentwhich Elinor had sent her, was led away by the exuberance of her joy tothink only of what would increase it.  Marianne was restored to herfrom a danger in which, as she now began to feel, her own mistakenjudgment in encouraging the unfortunate attachment to Willoughby, hadcontributed to place her;--and in her recovery she had yet anothersource of joy unthought of by Elinor.  It was thus imparted to her, assoon as any opportunity of private conference between them occurred."At last we are alone.  My Elinor, you do not yet know all myhappiness.  Colonel Brandon loves Marianne.  He has told me so himself."Her daughter, feeling by turns both pleased and pained, surprised andnot surprised, was all silent attention."You are never like me, dear Elinor, or I should wonder at yourcomposure now.  Had I sat down to wish for any possible good to myfamily, I should have fixed on Colonel Brandon's marrying one of you asthe object most desirable.  And I believe Marianne will be the mosthappy with him of the two."Elinor was half inclined to ask her reason for thinking so, becausesatisfied that none founded on an impartial consideration of their age,characters, or feelings, could be given;--but her mother must always becarried away by her imagination on any interesting subject, andtherefore instead of an inquiry, she passed it off with a smile."He opened his whole heart to me yesterday as we travelled.  It cameout quite unawares, quite undesignedly.  I, you may well believe, couldtalk of nothing but my child;--he could not conceal his distress; I sawthat it equalled my own, and he perhaps, thinking that mere friendship,as the world now goes, would not justify so warm a sympathy--or rather,not thinking at all, I suppose--giving way to irresistible feelings,made me acquainted with his earnest, tender, constant, affection forMarianne.  He has loved her, my Elinor, ever since the first moment ofseeing her."Here, however, Elinor perceived,--not the language, not the professionsof Colonel Brandon, but the natural embellishments of her mother'sactive fancy, which fashioned every thing delightful to her as it chose."His regard for her, infinitely surpassing anything that Willoughbyever felt or feigned, as much more warm, as more sincere orconstant--which ever we are to call it--has subsisted through all theknowledge of dear Marianne's unhappy prepossession for that worthlessyoung man!--and without selfishness--without encouraging a hope!--couldhe have seen her happy with another--Such a noble mind!--such openness,such sincerity!--no one can be deceived in HIM.""Colonel Brandon's character," said Elinor, "as an excellent man, iswell established.""I know it is,"--replied her mother seriously, "or after such a warning,I should be the last to encourage such affection, or even to be pleasedby it.  But his coming for me as he did, with such active, such readyfriendship, is enough to prove him one of the worthiest of men.""His character, however," answered Elinor, "does not rest on ONE act ofkindness, to which his affection for Marianne, were humanity out of thecase, would have prompted him.  To Mrs. Jennings, to the Middletons, hehas been long and intimately known; they equally love and respect him;and even my own knowledge of him, though lately acquired, is veryconsiderable; and so highly do I value and esteem him, that if Mariannecan be happy with him, I shall be as ready as yourself to think ourconnection the greatest blessing to us in the world.  What answer didyou give him?--Did you allow him to hope?""Oh! my love, I could not then talk of hope to him or to myself.Marianne might at that moment be dying.  But he did not ask for hope orencouragement.  His was an involuntary confidence, an irrepressibleeffusion to a soothing friend--not an application to a parent.  Yetafter a time I DID say, for at first I was quite overcome--that if shelived, as I trusted she might, my greatest happiness would lie inpromoting their marriage; and since our arrival, since our delightfulsecurity, I have repeated it to him more fully, have given him everyencouragement in my power.  Time, a very little time, I tell him, willdo everything;--Marianne's heart is not to be wasted for ever on such aman as Willoughby.-- His own merits must soon secure it.""To judge from the Colonel's spirits, however, you have not yet madehim equally sanguine.""No.--He thinks Marianne's affection too deeply rooted for any changein it under a great length of time, and even supposing her heart againfree, is too diffident of himself to believe, that with such adifference of age and disposition he could ever attach her.  There,however, he is quite mistaken.  His age is only so much beyond hers asto be an advantage, as to make his character and principles fixed;--andhis disposition, I am well convinced, is exactly the very one to makeyour sister happy.  And his person, his manners too, are all in hisfavour.  My partiality does not blind me; he certainly is not sohandsome as Willoughby--but at the same time, there is something muchmore pleasing in his countenance.-- There was always a something,--ifyou remember,--in Willoughby's eyes at times, which I did not like."Elinor could NOT remember it;--but her mother, without waiting for herassent, continued,"And his manners, the Colonel's manners are not only more pleasing tome than Willoughby's ever were, but they are of a kind I well know tobe more solidly attaching to Marianne.  Their gentleness, their genuineattention to other people, and their manly unstudied simplicity is muchmore accordant with her real disposition, than the liveliness--oftenartificial, and often ill-timed of the other.  I am very sure myself,that had Willoughby turned out as really amiable, as he has provedhimself the contrary, Marianne would yet never have been so happy withHIM, as she will be with Colonel Brandon."She paused.--Her daughter could not quite agree with her, but herdissent was not heard, and therefore gave no offence."At Delaford, she will be within an easy distance of me," added Mrs.Dashwood, "even if I remain at Barton; and in all probability,--for Ihear it is a large village,--indeed there certainly MUST be some smallhouse or cottage close by, that would suit us quite as well as ourpresent situation."Poor Elinor!--here was a new scheme for getting her to Delaford!--buther spirit was stubborn."His fortune too!--for at my time of life you know, everybody caresabout THAT;--and though I neither know nor desire to know, what itreally is, I am sure it must be a good one."Here they were interrupted by the entrance of a third person, andElinor withdrew to think it all over in private, to wish success to herfriend, and yet in wishing it, to feel a pang for Willoughby.Marianne's illness, though weakening in its kind, had not been longenough to make her recovery slow; and with youth, natural strength, andher mother's presence in aid, it proceeded so smoothly as to enable herto remove, within four days after the arrival of the latter, into Mrs.Palmer's dressing-room.  When there, at her own particular request, forshe was impatient to pour forth her thanks to him for fetching hermother, Colonel Brandon was invited to visit her.His emotion on entering the room, in seeing her altered looks, and inreceiving the pale hand which she immediately held out to him, wassuch, as, in Elinor's conjecture, must arise from something more thanhis affection for Marianne, or the consciousness of its being known toothers; and she soon discovered in his melancholy eye and varyingcomplexion as he looked at her sister, the probable recurrence of manypast scenes of misery to his mind, brought back by that resemblancebetween Marianne and Eliza already acknowledged, and now strengthenedby the hollow eye, the sickly skin, the posture of reclining weakness,and the warm acknowledgment of peculiar obligation.Mrs. Dashwood, not less watchful of what passed than her daughter, butwith a mind very differently influenced, and therefore watching to verydifferent effect, saw nothing in the Colonel's behaviour but what arosefrom the most simple and self-evident sensations, while in the actionsand words of Marianne she persuaded herself to think that somethingmore than gratitude already dawned.At the end of another day or two, Marianne growing visibly strongerevery twelve hours, Mrs. Dashwood, urged equally by her own and herdaughter's wishes, began to talk of removing to Barton.  On HERmeasures depended those of her two friends; Mrs. Jennings could notquit Cleveland during the Dashwoods' stay; and Colonel Brandon was soonbrought, by their united request, to consider his own abode there asequally determinate, if not equally indispensable.  At his and Mrs.Jennings's united request in return, Mrs. Dashwood was prevailed on toaccept the use of his carriage on her journey back, for the betteraccommodation of her sick child; and the Colonel, at the jointinvitation of Mrs. Dashwood and Mrs. Jennings, whose active good-naturemade her friendly and hospitable for other people as well as herself,engaged with pleasure to redeem it by a visit at the cottage, in thecourse of a few weeks.The day of separation and departure arrived; and Marianne, after takingso particular and lengthened a leave of Mrs. Jennings, one so earnestlygrateful, so full of respect and kind wishes as seemed due to her ownheart from a secret acknowledgment of past inattention, and biddingColonel Brandon farewell with a cordiality of a friend, was carefullyassisted by him into the carriage, of which he seemed anxious that sheshould engross at least half.  Mrs. Dashwood and Elinor then followed,and the others were left by themselves, to talk of the travellers, andfeel their own dullness, till Mrs. Jennings was summoned to her chaiseto take comfort in the gossip of her maid for the loss of her two youngcompanions; and Colonel Brandon immediately afterwards took hissolitary way to Delaford.The Dashwoods were two days on the road, and Marianne bore her journeyon both, without essential fatigue.  Every thing that the most zealousaffection, the most solicitous care could do to render her comfortable,was the office of each watchful companion, and each found their rewardin her bodily ease, and her calmness of spirits.  To Elinor, theobservation of the latter was particularly grateful.  She, who had seenher week after week so constantly suffering, oppressed by anguish ofheart which she had neither courage to speak of, nor fortitude toconceal, now saw with a joy, which no other could equally share, anapparent composure of mind, which, in being the result as she trustedof serious reflection, must eventually lead her to contentment andcheerfulness.As they approached Barton, indeed, and entered on scenes of which everyfield and every tree brought some peculiar, some painful recollection,she grew silent and thoughtful, and turning away her face from theirnotice, sat earnestly gazing through the window.  But here, Elinorcould neither wonder nor blame; and when she saw, as she assistedMarianne from the carriage, that she had been crying, she saw only anemotion too natural in itself to raise any thing less tender than pity,and in its unobtrusiveness entitled to praise.  In the whole of hersubsequent manner, she traced the direction of a mind awakened toreasonable exertion; for no sooner had they entered their commonsitting-room, than Marianne turned her eyes around it with a look ofresolute firmness, as if determined at once to accustom herself to thesight of every object with which the remembrance of Willoughby could beconnected.--She said little, but every sentence aimed at cheerfulness,and though a sigh sometimes escaped her, it never passed away withoutthe atonement of a smile.  After dinner she would try her piano-forte.She went to it; but the music on which her eye first rested was anopera, procured for her by Willoughby, containing some of theirfavourite duets, and bearing on its outward leaf her own name in hishand-writing.--That would not do.--She shook her head, put the musicaside, and after running over the keys for a minute, complained offeebleness in her fingers, and closed the instrument again; declaringhowever with firmness as she did so, that she should in future practicemuch.The next morning produced no abatement in these happy symptoms.  On thecontrary, with a mind and body alike strengthened by rest, she lookedand spoke with more genuine spirit, anticipating the pleasure ofMargaret's return, and talking of the dear family party which wouldthen be restored, of their mutual pursuits and cheerful society, as theonly happiness worth a wish."When the weather is settled, and I have recovered my strength," saidshe, "we will take long walks together every day.  We will walk to thefarm at the edge of the down, and see how the children go on; we willwalk to Sir John's new plantations at Barton Cross, and the Abbeyland;and we will often go to the old ruins of the Priory, and try to trace itsfoundations as far as we are told they once reached.  I know we shallbe happy.  I know the summer will pass happily away.  I mean never tobe later in rising than six, and from that time till dinner I shalldivide every moment between music and reading.  I have formed my plan,and am determined to enter on a course of serious study.  Our ownlibrary is too well known to me, to be resorted to for any thing beyondmere amusement.  But there are many works well worth reading at thePark; and there are others of more modern production which I know I canborrow of Colonel Brandon.  By reading only six hours a-day, I shallgain in the course of a twelve-month a great deal of instruction whichI now feel myself to want."Elinor honoured her for a plan which originated so nobly as this;though smiling to see the same eager fancy which had been leading herto the extreme of languid indolence and selfish repining, now at workin introducing excess into a scheme of such rational employment andvirtuous self-control. Her smile however changed to a sigh when sheremembered that promise to Willoughby was yet unfulfilled, and fearedshe had that to communicate which might again unsettle the mind ofMarianne, and ruin at least for a time this fair prospect of busytranquillity.  Willing therefore to delay the evil hour, she resolvedto wait till her sister's health were more secure, before she appointedit.  But the resolution was made only to be broken.Marianne had been two or three days at home, before the weather wasfine enough for an invalid like herself to venture out.  But at last asoft, genial morning appeared; such as might tempt the daughter'swishes and the mother's confidence; and Marianne, leaning on Elinor'sarm, was authorised to walk as long as she could without fatigue, inthe lane before the house.The sisters set out at a pace, slow as the feebleness of Marianne in anexercise hitherto untried since her illness required;--and they hadadvanced only so far beyond the house as to admit a full view of thehill, the important hill behind, when pausing with her eyes turnedtowards it, Marianne calmly said,"There, exactly there,"--pointing with one hand, "on that projectingmound,--there I fell; and there I first saw Willoughby."Her voice sunk with the word, but presently reviving she added,"I am thankful to find that I can look with so little pain on thespot!--shall we ever talk on that subject, Elinor?"--hesitatingly itwas said.--"Or will it be wrong?--I can talk of it now, I hope, as Iought to do."--Elinor tenderly invited her to be open."As for regret," said Marianne, "I have done with that, as far as HE isconcerned.  I do not mean to talk to you of what my feelings have beenfor him, but what they are NOW.--At present, if I could be satisfied onone point, if I could be allowed to think that he was not ALWAYS actinga part, not ALWAYS deceiving me;--but above all, if I could be assuredthat he never was so VERY wicked as my fears have sometimes fanciedhim, since the story of that unfortunate girl"--She stopt.  Elinor joyfully treasured her words as she answered,"If you could be assured of that, you think you should be easy.""Yes. My peace of mind is doubly involved in it;--for not only is ithorrible to suspect a person, who has been what HE has been to ME, ofsuch designs,--but what must it make me appear to myself?--What in asituation like mine, but a most shamefully unguarded affection couldexpose me to"--"How then," asked her sister, "would you account for his behaviour?""I would suppose him,--Oh, how gladly would I suppose him, only fickle,very, very fickle."Elinor said no more.  She was debating within herself on theeligibility of beginning her story directly, or postponing it tillMarianne were in stronger health;--and they crept on for a few minutesin silence."I am not wishing him too much good," said Marianne at last with asigh, "when I wish his secret reflections may be no more unpleasantthan my own.  He will suffer enough in them.""Do you compare your conduct with his?""No. I compare it with what it ought to have been; I compare it withyours.""Our situations have borne little resemblance.""They have borne more than our conduct.--Do not, my dearest Elinor, letyour kindness defend what I know your judgment must censure.  Myillness has made me think-- It has given me leisure and calmness forserious recollection.  Long before I was enough recovered to talk, Iwas perfectly able to reflect.  I considered the past: I saw in my ownbehaviour, since the beginning of our acquaintance with him lastautumn, nothing but a series of imprudence towards myself, and want ofkindness to others.  I saw that my own feelings had prepared mysufferings, and that my want of fortitude under them had almost led meto the grave.  My illness, I well knew, had been entirely brought on bymyself by such negligence of my own health, as I had felt even at thetime to be wrong.  Had I died,--it would have been self-destruction. Idid not know my danger till the danger was removed; but with suchfeelings as these reflections gave me, I wonder at my recovery,--wonderthat the very eagerness of my desire to live, to have time foratonement to my God, and to you all, did not kill me at once.  Had Idied,--in what peculiar misery should I have left you, my nurse, myfriend, my sister!--You, who had seen all the fretful selfishness of mylatter days; who had known all the murmurings of my heart!--How shouldI have lived in YOUR remembrance!--My mother too! How could you haveconsoled her!--I cannot express my own abhorrence of myself.  WheneverI looked towards the past, I saw some duty neglected, or some failingindulged.  Every body seemed injured by me.  The kindness, theunceasing kindness of Mrs. Jennings, I had repaid with ungratefulcontempt.  To the Middletons, to the Palmers, the Steeles, to everycommon acquaintance even, I had been insolent and unjust; with a hearthardened against their merits, and a temper irritated by their veryattention.--To John, to Fanny,--yes, even to them, little as theydeserve, I had given less than their due.  But you,--you above all,above my mother, had been wronged by me.  I, and only I, knew yourheart and its sorrows; yet to what did it influence me?--not to anycompassion that could benefit you or myself.--Your example was beforeme; but to what avail?--Was I more considerate of you and your comfort?Did I imitate your forbearance, or lessen your restraints, by takingany part in those offices of general complaisance or particulargratitude which you had hitherto been left to dischargealone?--No;--not less when I knew you to be unhappy, than when I hadbelieved you at ease, did I turn away from every exertion of duty orfriendship; scarcely allowing sorrow to exist but with me, regrettingonly THAT heart which had deserted and wronged me, and leaving you, forwhom I professed an unbounded affection, to be miserable for my sake."Here ceased the rapid flow of her self-reproving spirit; and Elinor,impatient to soothe, though too honest to flatter, gave her instantlythat praise and support which her frankness and her contrition so welldeserved.  Marianne pressed her hand and replied,"You are very good.--The future must be my proof.  I have laid down myplan, and if I am capable of adhering to it--my feelings shall begoverned and my temper improved.  They shall no longer worry others,nor torture myself.  I shall now live solely for my family.  You, mymother, and Margaret, must henceforth be all the world to me; you willshare my affections entirely between you.  From you, from my home, Ishall never again have the smallest incitement to move; and if I do mixin other society, it will be only to shew that my spirit is humbled, myheart amended, and that I can practise the civilities, the lesserduties of life, with gentleness and forbearance.  As for Willoughby--tosay that I shall soon or that I shall ever forget him, would be idle.His remembrance can be overcome by no change of circumstances oropinions.  But it shall be regulated, it shall be checked by religion,by reason, by constant employment."She paused--and added in a low voice, "If I could but know HIS heart,everything would become easy."Elinor, who had now been for some time reflecting on the propriety orimpropriety of speedily hazarding her narration, without feeling at allnearer decision than at first, heard this; and perceiving that asreflection did nothing, resolution must do all, soon found herselfleading to the fact.She managed the recital, as she hoped, with address; prepared heranxious listener with caution; related simply and honestly the chiefpoints on which Willoughby grounded his apology; did justice to hisrepentance, and softened only his protestations of present regard.Marianne said not a word.--She trembled, her eyes were fixed on theground, and her lips became whiter than even sickness had left them.  Athousand inquiries sprung up from her heart, but she dared not urgeone.  She caught every syllable with panting eagerness; her hand,unknowingly to herself, closely pressed her sister's, and tears coveredher cheeks.Elinor, dreading her being tired, led her towards home; and till theyreached the door of the cottage, easily conjecturing what her curiositymust be though no question was suffered to speak it, talked of nothingbut Willoughby, and their conversation together; and was carefullyminute in every particular of speech and look, where minuteness couldbe safely indulged.  As soon as they entered the house, Marianne with akiss of gratitude and these two words just articulate through hertears, "Tell mama," withdrew from her sister and walked slowly upstairs.  Elinor would not attempt to disturb a solitude so reasonableas what she now sought; and with a mind anxiously pre-arranging itsresult, and a resolution of reviving the subject again, should Mariannefail to do it, she turned into the parlour to fulfill her partinginjunction.Mrs. Dashwood did not hear unmoved the vindication of her formerfavourite.  She rejoiced in his being cleared from some part of hisimputed guilt;--she was sorry for him;--she wished him happy.  But thefeelings of the past could not be recalled.--Nothing could restore himwith a faith unbroken--a character unblemished, to Marianne.  Nothingcould do away the knowledge of what the latter had suffered through hismeans, nor remove the guilt of his conduct towards Eliza.  Nothingcould replace him, therefore, in her former esteem, nor injure theinterests of Colonel Brandon.Had Mrs. Dashwood, like her daughter, heard Willoughby's story fromhimself--had she witnessed his distress, and been under the influenceof his countenance and his manner, it is probable that her compassionwould have been greater.  But it was neither in Elinor's power, nor inher wish, to rouse such feelings in another, by her retailedexplanation, as had at first been called forth in herself.  Reflectionhad given calmness to her judgment, and sobered her own opinion ofWilloughby's deserts;--she wished, therefore, to declare only thesimple truth, and lay open such facts as were really due to hischaracter, without any embellishment of tenderness to lead the fancyastray.In the evening, when they were all three together, Marianne beganvoluntarily to speak of him again;--but that it was not without aneffort, the restless, unquiet thoughtfulness in which she had been forsome time previously sitting--her rising colour, as she spoke,--and herunsteady voice, plainly shewed."I wish to assure you both," said she, "that I see every thing--as youcan desire me to do."Mrs. Dashwood would have interrupted her instantly with soothingtenderness, had not Elinor, who really wished to hear her sister'sunbiased opinion, by an eager sign, engaged her silence.  Marianneslowly continued--"It is a great relief to me--what Elinor told me this morning--I havenow heard exactly what I wished to hear."--For some moments her voicewas lost; but recovering herself, she added, and with greater calmnessthan before--"I am now perfectly satisfied, I wish for no change.  Inever could have been happy with him, after knowing, as sooner or laterI must have known, all this.--I should have had no confidence, noesteem.  Nothing could have done it away to my feelings.""I know it--I know it," cried her mother.  "Happy with a man oflibertine practices!--With one who so injured the peace of the dearestof our friends, and the best of men!--No--my Marianne has not a heartto be made happy with such a man!--Her conscience, her sensitiveconscience, would have felt all that the conscience of her husbandought to have felt."Marianne sighed, and repeated, "I wish for no change.""You consider the matter," said Elinor, "exactly as a good mind and asound understanding must consider it; and I dare say you perceive, aswell as myself, not only in this, but in many other circumstances,reason enough to be convinced that your marriage must have involved youin many certain troubles and disappointments, in which you would havebeen poorly supported by an affection, on his side, much less certain.Had you married, you must have been always poor.  His expensiveness isacknowledged even by himself, and his whole conduct declares thatself-denial is a word hardly understood by him.  His demands and yourinexperience together, on a small, very small income, must have broughton distresses which would not be the LESS grievous to you, from havingbeen entirely unknown and unthought of before.  YOUR sense of honourand honesty would have led you, I know, when aware of your situation,to attempt all the economy that would appear to you possible: and,perhaps, as long as your frugality retrenched only on your own comfort,you might have been suffered to practice it, but beyond that--and howlittle could the utmost of your single management do to stop the ruinwhich had begun before your marriage?-- Beyond THAT, had youendeavoured, however reasonably, to abridge HIS enjoyments, is it notto be feared, that instead of prevailing on feelings so selfish toconsent to it, you would have lessened your own influence on his heart,and made him regret the connection which had involved him in suchdifficulties?"Marianne's lips quivered, and she repeated the word "Selfish?" in atone that implied--"do you really think him selfish?""The whole of his behaviour," replied Elinor, "from the beginning tothe end of the affair, has been grounded on selfishness.  It wasselfishness which first made him sport with your affections; whichafterwards, when his own were engaged, made him delay the confession ofit, and which finally carried him from Barton.  His own enjoyment, orhis own ease, was, in every particular, his ruling principle.""It is very true.  MY happiness never was his object.""At present," continued Elinor, "he regrets what he has done.  And whydoes he regret it?--Because he finds it has not answered towardshimself.  It has not made him happy.  His circumstances are nowunembarrassed--he suffers from no evil of that kind; and he thinks onlythat he has married a woman of a less amiable temper than yourself.But does it follow that had he married you, he would have beenhappy?--The inconveniences would have been different.  He would thenhave suffered under the pecuniary distresses which, because they areremoved, he now reckons as nothing.  He would have had a wife of whosetemper he could make no complaint, but he would have been alwaysnecessitous--always poor; and probably would soon have learned to rankthe innumerable comforts of a clear estate and good income as of farmore importance, even to domestic happiness, than the mere temper of awife.""I have not a doubt of it," said Marianne; "and I have nothing toregret--nothing but my own folly.""Rather say your mother's imprudence, my child," said Mrs. Dashwood;"SHE must be answerable."Marianne would not let her proceed;--and Elinor, satisfied that eachfelt their own error, wished to avoid any survey of the past that mightweaken her sister's spirits; she, therefore, pursuing the firstsubject, immediately continued,"One observation may, I think, be fairly drawn from the whole of thestory--that all Willoughby's difficulties have arisen from the firstoffence against virtue, in his behaviour to Eliza Williams.  That crimehas been the origin of every lesser one, and of all his presentdiscontents."Marianne assented most feelingly to the remark; and her mother was ledby it to an enumeration of Colonel Brandon's injuries and merits, warmas friendship and design could unitedly dictate.  Her daughter did notlook, however, as if much of it were heard by her.Elinor, according to her expectation, saw on the two or three followingdays, that Marianne did not continue to gain strength as she had done;but while her resolution was unsubdued, and she still tried to appearcheerful and easy, her sister could safely trust to the effect of timeupon her health.Margaret returned, and the family were again all restored to eachother, again quietly settled at the cottage; and if not pursuing theirusual studies with quite so much vigour as when they first came toBarton, at least planning a vigorous prosecution of them in future.Elinor grew impatient for some tidings of Edward.  She had heardnothing of him since her leaving London, nothing new of his plans,nothing certain even of his present abode.  Some letters had passedbetween her and her brother, in consequence of Marianne's illness; andin the first of John's, there had been this sentence:-- "We knownothing of our unfortunate Edward, and can make no enquiries on soprohibited a subject, but conclude him to be still at Oxford;" whichwas all the intelligence of Edward afforded her by the correspondence,for his name was not even mentioned in any of the succeeding letters.She was not doomed, however, to be long in ignorance of his measures.Their man-servant had been sent one morning to Exeter on business; andwhen, as he waited at table, he had satisfied the inquiries of hismistress as to the event of his errand, this was his voluntarycommunication--"I suppose you know, ma'am, that Mr. Ferrars is married."Marianne gave a violent start, fixed her eyes upon Elinor, saw herturning pale, and fell back in her chair in hysterics.  Mrs. Dashwood,whose eyes, as she answered the servant's inquiry, had intuitivelytaken the same direction, was shocked to perceive by Elinor'scountenance how much she really suffered, and a moment afterwards,alike distressed by Marianne's situation, knew not on which child tobestow her principal attention.The servant, who saw only that Miss Marianne was taken ill, had senseenough to call one of the maids, who, with Mrs. Dashwood's assistance,supported her into the other room.  By that time, Marianne was ratherbetter, and her mother leaving her to the care of Margaret and themaid, returned to Elinor, who, though still much disordered, had so farrecovered the use of her reason and voice as to be just beginning aninquiry of Thomas, as to the source of his intelligence.  Mrs. Dashwoodimmediately took all that trouble on herself; and Elinor had thebenefit of the information without the exertion of seeking it."Who told you that Mr. Ferrars was married, Thomas?""I see Mr. Ferrars myself, ma'am, this morning in Exeter, and his ladytoo, Miss Steele as was.  They was stopping in a chaise at the door ofthe New London Inn, as I went there with a message from Sally at thePark to her brother, who is one of the post-boys. I happened to look upas I went by the chaise, and so I see directly it was the youngest MissSteele; so I took off my hat, and she knew me and called to me, andinquired after you, ma'am, and the young ladies, especially MissMarianne, and bid me I should give her compliments and Mr. Ferrars's,their best compliments and service, and how sorry they was they had nottime to come on and see you, but they was in a great hurry to goforwards, for they was going further down for a little while, buthowsever, when they come back, they'd make sure to come and see you.""But did she tell you she was married, Thomas?""Yes, ma'am. She smiled, and said how she had changed her name sinceshe was in these parts.  She was always a very affable and free-spokenyoung lady, and very civil behaved.  So, I made free to wish her joy.""Was Mr. Ferrars in the carriage with her?""Yes, ma'am, I just see him leaning back in it, but he did not lookup;--he never was a gentleman much for talking."Elinor's heart could easily account for his not putting himselfforward; and Mrs. Dashwood probably found the same explanation."Was there no one else in the carriage?""No, ma'am, only they two.""Do you know where they came from?""They come straight from town, as Miss Lucy--Mrs. Ferrars told me.""And are they going farther westward?""Yes, ma'am--but not to bide long.  They will soon be back again, andthen they'd be sure and call here."Mrs. Dashwood now looked at her daughter; but Elinor knew better thanto expect them.  She recognised the whole of Lucy in the message, andwas very confident that Edward would never come near them.  Sheobserved in a low voice, to her mother, that they were probably goingdown to Mr. Pratt's, near Plymouth.Thomas's intelligence seemed over.  Elinor looked as if she wished tohear more."Did you see them off, before you came away?""No, ma'am--the horses were just coming out, but I could not bide anylonger; I was afraid of being late.""Did Mrs. Ferrars look well?""Yes, ma'am, she said how she was very well; and to my mind she wasalways a very handsome young lady--and she seemed vastly contented."Mrs. Dashwood could think of no other question, and Thomas and thetablecloth, now alike needless, were soon afterwards dismissed.Marianne had already sent to say, that she should eat nothing more.Mrs. Dashwood's and Elinor's appetites were equally lost, and Margaretmight think herself very well off, that with so much uneasiness as bothher sisters had lately experienced, so much reason as they had oftenhad to be careless of their meals, she had never been obliged to gowithout her dinner before.When the dessert and the wine were arranged, and Mrs. Dashwood andElinor were left by themselves, they remained long together in asimilarity of thoughtfulness and silence.  Mrs. Dashwood feared tohazard any remark, and ventured not to offer consolation.  She nowfound that she had erred in relying on Elinor's representation ofherself; and justly concluded that every thing had been expresslysoftened at the time, to spare her from an increase of unhappiness,suffering as she then had suffered for Marianne.  She found that shehad been misled by the careful, the considerate attention of herdaughter, to think the attachment, which once she had so wellunderstood, much slighter in reality, than she had been wont tobelieve, or than it was now proved to be.  She feared that under thispersuasion she had been unjust, inattentive, nay, almost unkind, to herElinor;--that Marianne's affliction, because more acknowledged, moreimmediately before her, had too much engrossed her tenderness, and ledher away to forget that in Elinor she might have a daughter sufferingalmost as much, certainly with less self-provocation, and greaterfortitude.Elinor now found the difference between the expectation of anunpleasant event, however certain the mind may be told to consider it,and certainty itself.  She now found, that in spite of herself, she hadalways admitted a hope, while Edward remained single, that somethingwould occur to prevent his marrying Lucy; that some resolution of hisown, some mediation of friends, or some more eligible opportunity ofestablishment for the lady, would arise to assist the happiness of all.But he was now married; and she condemned her heart for the lurkingflattery, which so much heightened the pain of the intelligence.That he should be married soon, before (as she imagined) he could be inorders, and consequently before he could be in possession of theliving, surprised her a little at first.  But she soon saw how likelyit was that Lucy, in her self-provident care, in her haste to securehim, should overlook every thing but the risk of delay.  They weremarried, married in town, and now hastening down to her uncle's.  Whathad Edward felt on being within four miles from Barton, on seeing hermother's servant, on hearing Lucy's message!They would soon, she supposed, be settled at Delaford.--Delaford,--thatplace in which so much conspired to give her an interest; which shewished to be acquainted with, and yet desired to avoid.  She saw themin an instant in their parsonage-house; saw in Lucy, the active,contriving manager, uniting at once a desire of smart appearance withthe utmost frugality, and ashamed to be suspected of half hereconomical practices;--pursuing her own interest in every thought,courting the favour of Colonel Brandon, of Mrs. Jennings, and of everywealthy friend.  In Edward--she knew not what she saw, nor what shewished to see;--happy or unhappy,--nothing pleased her; she turned awayher head from every sketch of him.Elinor flattered herself that some one of their connections in Londonwould write to them to announce the event, and give fartherparticulars,--but day after day passed off, and brought no letter, notidings.  Though uncertain that any one were to blame, she found faultwith every absent friend.  They were all thoughtless or indolent."When do you write to Colonel Brandon, ma'am?" was an inquiry whichsprung from the impatience of her mind to have something going on."I wrote to him, my love, last week, and rather expect to see, than tohear from him again.  I earnestly pressed his coming to us, and shouldnot be surprised to see him walk in today or tomorrow, or any day."This was gaining something, something to look forward to.  ColonelBrandon must have some information to give.Scarcely had she so determined it, when the figure of a man onhorseback drew her eyes to the window.  He stopt at their gate.  It wasa gentleman, it was Colonel Brandon himself.  Now she could hear more;and she trembled in expectation of it.  But--it was NOT ColonelBrandon--neither his air--nor his height.  Were it possible, she mustsay it must be Edward.  She looked again.  He had just dismounted;--shecould not be mistaken,--it WAS Edward.  She moved away and sat down."He comes from Mr. Pratt's purposely to see us.  I WILL be calm; I WILLbe mistress of myself."In a moment she perceived that the others were likewise aware of themistake.  She saw her mother and Marianne change colour; saw them lookat herself, and whisper a few sentences to each other.  She would havegiven the world to be able to speak--and to make them understand thatshe hoped no coolness, no slight, would appear in their behaviour tohim;--but she had no utterance, and was obliged to leave all to theirown discretion.Not a syllable passed aloud.  They all waited in silence for theappearance of their visitor.  His footsteps were heard along the gravelpath; in a moment he was in the passage, and in another he was beforethem.His countenance, as he entered the room, was not too happy, even forElinor.  His complexion was white with agitation, and he looked as iffearful of his reception, and conscious that he merited no kind one.Mrs. Dashwood, however, conforming, as she trusted, to the wishes ofthat daughter, by whom she then meant in the warmth of her heart to beguided in every thing, met with a look of forced complacency, gave himher hand, and wished him joy.He coloured, and stammered out an unintelligible reply.  Elinor's lipshad moved with her mother's, and, when the moment of action was over,she wished that she had shaken hands with him too.  But it was then toolate, and with a countenance meaning to be open, she sat down again andtalked of the weather.Marianne had retreated as much as possible out of sight, to conceal herdistress; and Margaret, understanding some part, but not the whole ofthe case, thought it incumbent on her to be dignified, and thereforetook a seat as far from him as she could, and maintained a strictsilence.When Elinor had ceased to rejoice in the dryness of the season, a veryawful pause took place.  It was put an end to by Mrs. Dashwood, whofelt obliged to hope that he had left Mrs. Ferrars very well.  In ahurried manner, he replied in the affirmative.Another pause.Elinor resolving to exert herself, though fearing the sound of her ownvoice, now said,"Is Mrs. Ferrars at Longstaple?""At Longstaple!" he replied, with an air of surprise.-- "No, my motheris in town.""I meant," said Elinor, taking up some work from the table, "to inquirefor Mrs. EDWARD Ferrars."She dared not look up;--but her mother and Marianne both turned theireyes on him.  He coloured, seemed perplexed, looked doubtingly, and,after some hesitation, said,--"Perhaps you mean--my brother--you mean Mrs.--Mrs. ROBERT Ferrars.""Mrs. Robert Ferrars!"--was repeated by Marianne and her mother in anaccent of the utmost amazement;--and though Elinor could not speak,even HER eyes were fixed on him with the same impatient wonder.  Herose from his seat, and walked to the window, apparently from notknowing what to do; took up a pair of scissors that lay there, andwhile spoiling both them and their sheath by cutting the latter topieces as he spoke, said, in a hurried voice,"Perhaps you do not know--you may not have heard that my brother islately married to--to the youngest--to Miss Lucy Steele."His words were echoed with unspeakable astonishment by all but Elinor,who sat with her head leaning over her work, in a state of suchagitation as made her hardly know where she was."Yes," said he, "they were married last week, and are now at Dawlish."Elinor could sit it no longer.  She almost ran out of the room, and assoon as the door was closed, burst into tears of joy, which at firstshe thought would never cease.  Edward, who had till then looked anywhere, rather than at her, saw her hurry away, and perhaps saw--or evenheard, her emotion; for immediately afterwards he fell into a reverie,which no remarks, no inquiries, no affectionate address of Mrs.Dashwood could penetrate, and at last, without saying a word, quittedthe room, and walked out towards the village--leaving the others in thegreatest astonishment and perplexity on a change in his situation, sowonderful and so sudden;--a perplexity which they had no means oflessening but by their own conjectures.Unaccountable, however, as the circumstances of his release mightappear to the whole family, it was certain that Edward was free; and towhat purpose that freedom would be employed was easily pre-determinedby all;--for after experiencing the blessings of ONE imprudentengagement, contracted without his mother's consent, as he had alreadydone for more than four years, nothing less could be expected of him inthe failure of THAT, than the immediate contraction of another.His errand at Barton, in fact, was a simple one.  It was only to askElinor to marry him;--and considering that he was not altogetherinexperienced in such a question, it might be strange that he shouldfeel so uncomfortable in the present case as he really did, so much inneed of encouragement and fresh air.How soon he had walked himself into the proper resolution, however, howsoon an opportunity of exercising it occurred, in what manner heexpressed himself, and how he was received, need not be particularlytold.  This only need be said;--that when they all sat down to table atfour o'clock, about three hours after his arrival, he had secured hislady, engaged her mother's consent, and was not only in the rapturousprofession of the lover, but, in the reality of reason and truth, oneof the happiest of men.  His situation indeed was more than commonlyjoyful.  He had more than the ordinary triumph of accepted love toswell his heart, and raise his spirits.  He was released without anyreproach to himself, from an entanglement which had long formed hismisery, from a woman whom he had long ceased to love;--and elevated atonce to that security with another, which he must have thought ofalmost with despair, as soon as he had learnt to consider it withdesire.  He was brought, not from doubt or suspense, but from misery tohappiness;--and the change was openly spoken in such a genuine,flowing, grateful cheerfulness, as his friends had never witnessed inhim before.His heart was now open to Elinor, all its weaknesses, all its errorsconfessed, and his first boyish attachment to Lucy treated with all thephilosophic dignity of twenty-four."It was a foolish, idle inclination on my side," said he, "theconsequence of ignorance of the world--and want of employment.  Had mymother given me some active profession when I was removed at eighteenfrom the care of Mr. Pratt, I think--nay, I am sure, it would neverhave happened; for though I left Longstaple with what I thought, at thetime, a most unconquerable preference for his niece, yet had I then hadany pursuit, any object to engage my time and keep me at a distancefrom her for a few months, I should very soon have outgrown the fanciedattachment, especially by mixing more with the world, as in such case Imust have done.  But instead of having any thing to do, instead ofhaving any profession chosen for me, or being allowed to chuse anymyself, I returned home to be completely idle; and for the firsttwelvemonth afterwards I had not even the nominal employment, whichbelonging to the university would have given me; for I was not enteredat Oxford till I was nineteen.  I had therefore nothing in the world todo, but to fancy myself in love; and as my mother did not make my homein every respect comfortable, as I had no friend, no companion in mybrother, and disliked new acquaintance, it was not unnatural for me tobe very often at Longstaple, where I always felt myself at home, andwas always sure of a welcome; and accordingly I spent the greatest partof my time there from eighteen to nineteen: Lucy appeared everythingthat was amiable and obliging.  She was pretty too--at least I thoughtso THEN; and I had seen so little of other women, that I could make nocomparisons, and see no defects.  Considering everything, therefore, Ihope, foolish as our engagement was, foolish as it has since in everyway been proved, it was not at the time an unnatural or an inexcusablepiece of folly."The change which a few hours had wrought in the minds and the happinessof the Dashwoods, was such--so great--as promised them all, thesatisfaction of a sleepless night.  Mrs. Dashwood, too happy to becomfortable, knew not how to love Edward, nor praise Elinor enough, howto be enough thankful for his release without wounding his delicacy,nor how at once to give them leisure for unrestrained conversationtogether, and yet enjoy, as she wished, the sight and society of both.Marianne could speak HER happiness only by tears.  Comparisons wouldoccur--regrets would arise;--and her joy, though sincere as her lovefor her sister, was of a kind to give her neither spirits nor language.But Elinor--how are HER feelings to be described?--From the moment oflearning that Lucy was married to another, that Edward was free, to themoment of his justifying the hopes which had so instantly followed, shewas every thing by turns but tranquil.  But when the second moment hadpassed, when she found every doubt, every solicitude removed, comparedher situation with what so lately it had been,--saw him honourablyreleased from his former engagement, saw him instantly profiting by therelease, to address herself and declare an affection as tender, asconstant as she had ever supposed it to be,--she was oppressed, she wasovercome by her own felicity;--and happily disposed as is the humanmind to be easily familiarized with any change for the better, itrequired several hours to give sedateness to her spirits, or any degreeof tranquillity to her heart.Edward was now fixed at the cottage at least for a week;--for whateverother claims might be made on him, it was impossible that less than aweek should be given up to the enjoyment of Elinor's company, orsuffice to say half that was to be said of the past, the present, andthe future;--for though a very few hours spent in the hard labor ofincessant talking will despatch more subjects than can really be incommon between any two rational creatures, yet with lovers it isdifferent.  Between THEM no subject is finished, no communication iseven made, till it has been made at least twenty times over.Lucy's marriage, the unceasing and reasonable wonder among them all,formed of course one of the earliest discussions of the lovers;--andElinor's particular knowledge of each party made it appear to her inevery view, as one of the most extraordinary and unaccountablecircumstances she had ever heard.  How they could be thrown together,and by what attraction Robert could be drawn on to marry a girl, ofwhose beauty she had herself heard him speak without any admiration,--agirl too already engaged to his brother, and on whose account thatbrother had been thrown off by his family--it was beyond hercomprehension to make out.  To her own heart it was a delightfulaffair, to her imagination it was even a ridiculous one, but to herreason, her judgment, it was completely a puzzle.Edward could only attempt an explanation by supposing, that, perhaps,at first accidentally meeting, the vanity of the one had been so workedon by the flattery of the other, as to lead by degrees to all the rest.Elinor remembered what Robert had told her in Harley Street, of hisopinion of what his own mediation in his brother's affairs might havedone, if applied to in time.  She repeated it to Edward."THAT was exactly like Robert,"--was his immediate observation.--"AndTHAT," he presently added, "might perhaps be in HIS head when theacquaintance between them first began.  And Lucy perhaps at first mightthink only of procuring his good offices in my favour.  Other designsmight afterward arise."How long it had been carrying on between them, however, he was equallyat a loss with herself to make out; for at Oxford, where he hadremained for choice ever since his quitting London, he had had no meansof hearing of her but from herself, and her letters to the very lastwere neither less frequent, nor less affectionate than usual.  Not thesmallest suspicion, therefore, had ever occurred to prepare him forwhat followed;--and when at last it burst on him in a letter from Lucyherself, he had been for some time, he believed, half stupified betweenthe wonder, the horror, and the joy of such a deliverance.  He put theletter into Elinor's hands.     "DEAR SIR,     "Being very sure I have long lost your affections,     I have thought myself at liberty to bestow my own     on another, and have no doubt of being as happy with     him as I once used to think I might be with you;     but I scorn to accept a hand while the heart was     another's.  Sincerely wish you happy in your choice,     and it shall not be my fault if we are not always     good friends, as our near relationship now makes     proper.  I can safely say I owe you no ill-will,     and am sure you will be too generous to do us any     ill offices.  Your brother has gained my affections     entirely, and as we could not live without one     another, we are just returned from the altar, and     are now on our way to Dawlish for a few weeks, which     place your dear brother has great curiosity to see,     but thought I would first trouble you with these     few lines, and shall always remain,     "Your sincere well-wisher, friend, and sister,                                        "LUCY FERRARS.     "I have burnt all your letters, and will return     your picture the first opportunity.  Please to destroy     my scrawls--but the ring with my hair you are very     welcome to keep."Elinor read and returned it without any comment."I will not ask your opinion of it as a composition," saidEdward.--"For worlds would not I have had a letter of hers seen by YOUin former days.--In a sister it is bad enough, but in a wife!--how Ihave blushed over the pages of her writing!--and I believe I may saythat since the first half year of our foolish--business--this is theonly letter I ever received from her, of which the substance made meany amends for the defect of the style.""However it may have come about," said Elinor, after a pause,--"theyare certainly married.  And your mother has brought on herself a mostappropriate punishment.  The independence she settled on Robert,through resentment against you, has put it in his power to make his ownchoice; and she has actually been bribing one son with a thousanda-year, to do the very deed which she disinherited the other forintending to do.  She will hardly be less hurt, I suppose, by Robert'smarrying Lucy, than she would have been by your marrying her.""She will be more hurt by it, for Robert always was her favourite.--Shewill be more hurt by it, and on the same principle will forgive himmuch sooner."In what state the affair stood at present between them, Edward knewnot, for no communication with any of his family had yet been attemptedby him.  He had quitted Oxford within four and twenty hours afterLucy's letter arrived, and with only one object before him, the nearestroad to Barton, had had no leisure to form any scheme of conduct, withwhich that road did not hold the most intimate connection.  He could donothing till he were assured of his fate with Miss Dashwood; and by hisrapidity in seeking THAT fate, it is to be supposed, in spite of thejealousy with which he had once thought of Colonel Brandon, in spite ofthe modesty with which he rated his own deserts, and the politenesswith which he talked of his doubts, he did not, upon the whole, expecta very cruel reception.  It was his business, however, to say that heDID, and he said it very prettily.  What he might say on the subject atwelvemonth after, must be referred to the imagination of husbands andwives.That Lucy had certainly meant to deceive, to go off with a flourish ofmalice against him in her message by Thomas, was perfectly clear toElinor; and Edward himself, now thoroughly enlightened on hercharacter, had no scruple in believing her capable of the utmostmeanness of wanton ill-nature. Though his eyes had been long opened,even before his acquaintance with Elinor began, to her ignorance and awant of liberality in some of her opinions--they had been equallyimputed, by him, to her want of education; and till her last letterreached him, he had always believed her to be a well-disposed,good-hearted girl, and thoroughly attached to himself.  Nothing butsuch a persuasion could have prevented his putting an end to anengagement, which, long before the discovery of it laid him open to hismother's anger, had been a continual source of disquiet and regret tohim."I thought it my duty," said he, "independent of my feelings, to giveher the option of continuing the engagement or not, when I wasrenounced by my mother, and stood to all appearance without a friend inthe world to assist me.  In such a situation as that, where thereseemed nothing to tempt the avarice or the vanity of any livingcreature, how could I suppose, when she so earnestly, so warmlyinsisted on sharing my fate, whatever it might be, that any thing butthe most disinterested affection was her inducement?  And even now, Icannot comprehend on what motive she acted, or what fancied advantageit could be to her, to be fettered to a man for whom she had not thesmallest regard, and who had only two thousand pounds in the world.She could not foresee that Colonel Brandon would give me a living.""No; but she might suppose that something would occur in your favour;that your own family might in time relent.  And at any rate, she lostnothing by continuing the engagement, for she has proved that itfettered neither her inclination nor her actions.  The connection wascertainly a respectable one, and probably gained her considerationamong her friends; and, if nothing more advantageous occurred, it wouldbe better for her to marry YOU than be single."Edward was, of course, immediately convinced that nothing could havebeen more natural than Lucy's conduct, nor more self-evident than themotive of it.Elinor scolded him, harshly as ladies always scold the imprudence whichcompliments themselves, for having spent so much time with them atNorland, when he must have felt his own inconstancy."Your behaviour was certainly very wrong," said she; "because--to saynothing of my own conviction, our relations were all led away by it tofancy and expect WHAT, as you were THEN situated, could never be."He could only plead an ignorance of his own heart, and a mistakenconfidence in the force of his engagement."I was simple enough to think, that because my FAITH was plighted toanother, there could be no danger in my being with you; and that theconsciousness of my engagement was to keep my heart as safe and sacredas my honour.  I felt that I admired you, but I told myself it was onlyfriendship; and till I began to make comparisons between yourself andLucy, I did not know how far I was got.  After that, I suppose, I WASwrong in remaining so much in Sussex, and the arguments with which Ireconciled myself to the expediency of it, were no better thanthese:--The danger is my own; I am doing no injury to anybody butmyself."Elinor smiled, and shook her head.Edward heard with pleasure of Colonel Brandon's being expected at theCottage, as he really wished not only to be better acquainted with him,but to have an opportunity of convincing him that he no longer resentedhis giving him the living of Delaford--"Which, at present," said he,"after thanks so ungraciously delivered as mine were on the occasion,he must think I have never forgiven him for offering."NOW he felt astonished himself that he had never yet been to the place.But so little interest had he taken in the matter, that he owed all hisknowledge of the house, garden, and glebe, extent of the parish,condition of the land, and rate of the tithes, to Elinor herself, whohad heard so much of it from Colonel Brandon, and heard it with so muchattention, as to be entirely mistress of the subject.One question after this only remained undecided, between them, onedifficulty only was to be overcome.  They were brought together bymutual affection, with the warmest approbation of their real friends;their intimate knowledge of each other seemed to make their happinesscertain--and they only wanted something to live upon.  Edward had twothousand pounds, and Elinor one, which, with Delaford living, was allthat they could call their own; for it was impossible that Mrs.Dashwood should advance anything; and they were neither of them quiteenough in love to think that three hundred and fifty pounds a-yearwould supply them with the comforts of life.Edward was not entirely without hopes of some favourable change in hismother towards him; and on THAT he rested for the residue of theirincome.  But Elinor had no such dependence; for since Edward wouldstill be unable to marry Miss Morton, and his chusing herself had beenspoken of in Mrs. Ferrars's flattering language as only a lesser evilthan his chusing Lucy Steele, she feared that Robert's offence wouldserve no other purpose than to enrich Fanny.About four days after Edward's arrival Colonel Brandon appeared, tocomplete Mrs. Dashwood's satisfaction, and to give her the dignity ofhaving, for the first time since her living at Barton, more companywith her than her house would hold.  Edward was allowed to retain theprivilege of first comer, and Colonel Brandon therefore walked everynight to his old quarters at the Park; from whence he usually returnedin the morning, early enough to interrupt the lovers' first tete-a-tetebefore breakfast.A three weeks' residence at Delaford, where, in his evening hours atleast, he had little to do but to calculate the disproportion betweenthirty-six and seventeen, brought him to Barton in a temper of mindwhich needed all the improvement in Marianne's looks, all the kindnessof her welcome, and all the encouragement of her mother's language, tomake it cheerful.  Among such friends, however, and such flattery, hedid revive.  No rumour of Lucy's marriage had yet reached him:--he knewnothing of what had passed; and the first hours of his visit wereconsequently spent in hearing and in wondering.  Every thing wasexplained to him by Mrs. Dashwood, and he found fresh reason to rejoicein what he had done for Mr. Ferrars, since eventually it promoted theinterest of Elinor.It would be needless to say, that the gentlemen advanced in the goodopinion of each other, as they advanced in each other's acquaintance,for it could not be otherwise.  Their resemblance in good principlesand good sense, in disposition and manner of thinking, would probablyhave been sufficient to unite them in friendship, without any otherattraction; but their being in love with two sisters, and two sistersfond of each other, made that mutual regard inevitable and immediate,which might otherwise have waited the effect of time and judgment.The letters from town, which a few days before would have made everynerve in Elinor's body thrill with transport, now arrived to be readwith less emotion than mirth.  Mrs. Jennings wrote to tell thewonderful tale, to vent her honest indignation against the jiltinggirl, and pour forth her compassion towards poor Mr. Edward, who, shewas sure, had quite doted upon the worthless hussy, and was now, by allaccounts, almost broken-hearted, at Oxford.-- "I do think," shecontinued, "nothing was ever carried on so sly; for it was but two daysbefore Lucy called and sat a couple of hours with me.  Not a soulsuspected anything of the matter, not even Nancy, who, poor soul!  camecrying to me the day after, in a great fright for fear of Mrs. Ferrars,as well as not knowing how to get to Plymouth; for Lucy it seemsborrowed all her money before she went off to be married, on purpose wesuppose to make a show with, and poor Nancy had not seven shillings inthe world;--so I was very glad to give her five guineas to take herdown to Exeter, where she thinks of staying three or four weeks withMrs. Burgess, in hopes, as I tell her, to fall in with the Doctoragain.  And I must say that Lucy's crossness not to take them alongwith them in the chaise is worse than all.  Poor Mr. Edward! I cannotget him out of my head, but you must send for him to Barton, and MissMarianne must try to comfort him."Mr. Dashwood's strains were more solemn.  Mrs. Ferrars was the mostunfortunate of women--poor Fanny had suffered agonies ofsensibility--and he considered the existence of each, under such ablow, with grateful wonder.  Robert's offence was unpardonable, butLucy's was infinitely worse.  Neither of them were ever again to bementioned to Mrs. Ferrars; and even, if she might hereafter be inducedto forgive her son, his wife should never be acknowledged as herdaughter, nor be permitted to appear in her presence.  The secrecy withwhich everything had been carried on between them, was rationallytreated as enormously heightening the crime, because, had any suspicionof it occurred to the others, proper measures would have been taken toprevent the marriage; and he called on Elinor to join with him inregretting that Lucy's engagement with Edward had not rather beenfulfilled, than that she should thus be the means of spreading miseryfarther in the family.-- He thus continued:"Mrs. Ferrars has never yet mentioned Edward's name, which does notsurprise us; but, to our great astonishment, not a line has beenreceived from him on the occasion.  Perhaps, however, he is kept silentby his fear of offending, and I shall, therefore, give him a hint, by aline to Oxford, that his sister and I both think a letter of propersubmission from him, addressed perhaps to Fanny, and by her shewn toher mother, might not be taken amiss; for we all know the tenderness ofMrs. Ferrars's heart, and that she wishes for nothing so much as to beon good terms with her children."This paragraph was of some importance to the prospects and conduct ofEdward.  It determined him to attempt a reconciliation, though notexactly in the manner pointed out by their brother and sister."A letter of proper submission!" repeated he; "would they have me begmy mother's pardon for Robert's ingratitude to HER, and breach ofhonour to ME?--I can make no submission--I am grown neither humble norpenitent by what has passed.--I am grown very happy; but that would notinterest.--I know of no submission that IS proper for me to make.""You may certainly ask to be forgiven," said Elinor, "because you haveoffended;--and I should think you might NOW venture so far as toprofess some concern for having ever formed the engagement which drewon you your mother's anger."He agreed that he might."And when she has forgiven you, perhaps a little humility may beconvenient while acknowledging a second engagement, almost as imprudentin HER eyes as the first."He had nothing to urge against it, but still resisted the idea of aletter of proper submission; and therefore, to make it easier to him,as he declared a much greater willingness to make mean concessions byword of mouth than on paper, it was resolved that, instead of writingto Fanny, he should go to London, and personally intreat her goodoffices in his favour.-- "And if they really DO interest themselves,"said Marianne, in her new character of candour, "in bringing about areconciliation, I shall think that even John and Fanny are not entirelywithout merit."After a visit on Colonel Brandon's side of only three or four days, thetwo gentlemen quitted Barton together.-- They were to go immediately toDelaford, that Edward might have some personal knowledge of his futurehome, and assist his patron and friend in deciding on what improvementswere needed to it; and from thence, after staying there a couple ofnights, he was to proceed on his journey to town.After a proper resistance on the part of Mrs. Ferrars, just so violentand so steady as to preserve her from that reproach which she alwaysseemed fearful of incurring, the reproach of being too amiable, Edwardwas admitted to her presence, and pronounced to be again her son.Her family had of late been exceedingly fluctuating.  For many years ofher life she had had two sons; but the crime and annihilation of Edwarda few weeks ago, had robbed her of one; the similar annihilation ofRobert had left her for a fortnight without any; and now, by theresuscitation of Edward, she had one again.In spite of his being allowed once more to live, however, he did notfeel the continuance of his existence secure, till he had revealed hispresent engagement; for the publication of that circumstance, hefeared, might give a sudden turn to his constitution, and carry him offas rapidly as before.  With apprehensive caution therefore it wasrevealed, and he was listened to with unexpected calmness.  Mrs.Ferrars at first reasonably endeavoured to dissuade him from marryingMiss Dashwood, by every argument in her power;--told him, that in MissMorton he would have a woman of higher rank and larger fortune;--andenforced the assertion, by observing that Miss Morton was the daughterof a nobleman with thirty thousand pounds, while Miss Dashwood was onlythe daughter of a private gentleman with no more than THREE; but whenshe found that, though perfectly admitting the truth of herrepresentation, he was by no means inclined to be guided by it, shejudged it wisest, from the experience of the past, to submit--andtherefore, after such an ungracious delay as she owed to her owndignity, and as served to prevent every suspicion of good-will, sheissued her decree of consent to the marriage of Edward and Elinor.What she would engage to do towards augmenting their income was next tobe considered; and here it plainly appeared, that though Edward was nowher only son, he was by no means her eldest; for while Robert wasinevitably endowed with a thousand pounds a-year, not the smallestobjection was made against Edward's taking orders for the sake of twohundred and fifty at the utmost; nor was anything promised either forthe present or in future, beyond the ten thousand pounds, which hadbeen given with Fanny.It was as much, however, as was desired, and more than was expected, byEdward and Elinor; and Mrs. Ferrars herself, by her shuffling excuses,seemed the only person surprised at her not giving more.With an income quite sufficient to their wants thus secured to them,they had nothing to wait for after Edward was in possession of theliving, but the readiness of the house, to which Colonel Brandon, withan eager desire for the accommodation of Elinor, was makingconsiderable improvements; and after waiting some time for theircompletion, after experiencing, as usual, a thousand disappointmentsand delays from the unaccountable dilatoriness of the workmen, Elinor,as usual, broke through the first positive resolution of not marryingtill every thing was ready, and the ceremony took place in Bartonchurch early in the autumn.The first month after their marriage was spent with their friend at theMansion-house; from whence they could superintend the progress of theParsonage, and direct every thing as they liked on the spot;--couldchuse papers, project shrubberies, and invent a sweep.  Mrs. Jennings'sprophecies, though rather jumbled together, were chiefly fulfilled; forshe was able to visit Edward and his wife in their Parsonage byMichaelmas, and she found in Elinor and her husband, as she reallybelieved, one of the happiest couples in the world.  They had in factnothing to wish for, but the marriage of Colonel Brandon and Marianne,and rather better pasturage for their cows.They were visited on their first settling by almost all their relationsand friends.  Mrs. Ferrars came to inspect the happiness which she wasalmost ashamed of having authorised; and even the Dashwoods were at theexpense of a journey from Sussex to do them honour."I will not say that I am disappointed, my dear sister," said John, asthey were walking together one morning before the gates of DelafordHouse, "THAT would be saying too much, for certainly you have been oneof the most fortunate young women in the world, as it is.  But, Iconfess, it would give me great pleasure to call Colonel Brandonbrother.  His property here, his place, his house, every thing is insuch respectable and excellent condition!--and his woods!--I have notseen such timber any where in Dorsetshire, as there is now standing inDelaford Hanger!--And though, perhaps, Marianne may not seem exactlythe person to attract him--yet I think it would altogether be advisablefor you to have them now frequently staying with you, for as ColonelBrandon seems a great deal at home, nobody can tell what mayhappen--for, when people are much thrown together, and see little ofanybody else--and it will always be in your power to set her off toadvantage, and so forth;--in short, you may as well give her achance--You understand me."--But though Mrs. Ferrars DID come to see them, and always treated themwith the make-believe of decent affection, they were never insulted byher real favour and preference.  THAT was due to the folly of Robert,and the cunning of his wife; and it was earned by them before manymonths had passed away.  The selfish sagacity of the latter, which hadat first drawn Robert into the scrape, was the principal instrument ofhis deliverance from it; for her respectful humility, assiduousattentions, and endless flatteries, as soon as the smallest opening wasgiven for their exercise, reconciled Mrs. Ferrars to his choice, andre-established him completely in her favour.The whole of Lucy's behaviour in the affair, and the prosperity whichcrowned it, therefore, may be held forth as a most encouraging instanceof what an earnest, an unceasing attention to self-interest, howeverits progress may be apparently obstructed, will do in securing everyadvantage of fortune, with no other sacrifice than that of time andconscience.  When Robert first sought her acquaintance, and privatelyvisited her in Bartlett's Buildings, it was only with the view imputedto him by his brother.  He merely meant to persuade her to give up theengagement; and as there could be nothing to overcome but the affectionof both, he naturally expected that one or two interviews would settlethe matter.  In that point, however, and that only, he erred;--forthough Lucy soon gave him hopes that his eloquence would convince herin TIME, another visit, another conversation, was always wanted toproduce this conviction.  Some doubts always lingered in her mind whenthey parted, which could only be removed by another half hour'sdiscourse with himself.  His attendance was by this means secured, andthe rest followed in course.  Instead of talking of Edward, they camegradually to talk only of Robert,--a subject on which he had alwaysmore to say than on any other, and in which she soon betrayed aninterest even equal to his own; and in short, it became speedilyevident to both, that he had entirely supplanted his brother.  He wasproud of his conquest, proud of tricking Edward, and very proud ofmarrying privately without his mother's consent.  What immediatelyfollowed is known.  They passed some months in great happiness atDawlish; for she had many relations and old acquaintances to cut--andhe drew several plans for magnificent cottages;--and from thencereturning to town, procured the forgiveness of Mrs. Ferrars, by thesimple expedient of asking it, which, at Lucy's instigation, wasadopted.  The forgiveness, at first, indeed, as was reasonable,comprehended only Robert; and Lucy, who had owed his mother no duty andtherefore could have transgressed none, still remained some weekslonger unpardoned.  But perseverance in humility of conduct andmessages, in self-condemnation for Robert's offence, and gratitude forthe unkindness she was treated with, procured her in time the haughtynotice which overcame her by its graciousness, and led soon afterwards,by rapid degrees, to the highest state of affection and influence.Lucy became as necessary to Mrs. Ferrars, as either Robert or Fanny;and while Edward was never cordially forgiven for having once intendedto marry her, and Elinor, though superior to her in fortune and birth,was spoken of as an intruder, SHE was in every thing considered, andalways openly acknowledged, to be a favourite child.  They settled intown, received very liberal assistance from Mrs. Ferrars, were on thebest terms imaginable with the Dashwoods; and setting aside thejealousies and ill-will continually subsisting between Fanny and Lucy,in which their husbands of course took a part, as well as the frequentdomestic disagreements between Robert and Lucy themselves, nothingcould exceed the harmony in which they all lived together.What Edward had done to forfeit the right of eldest son, might havepuzzled many people to find out; and what Robert had done to succeed toit, might have puzzled them still more.  It was an arrangement,however, justified in its effects, if not in its cause; for nothingever appeared in Robert's style of living or of talking to give asuspicion of his regretting the extent of his income, as either leavinghis brother too little, or bringing himself too much;--and if Edwardmight be judged from the ready discharge of his duties in everyparticular, from an increasing attachment to his wife and his home, andfrom the regular cheerfulness of his spirits, he might be supposed noless contented with his lot, no less free from every wish of anexchange.Elinor's marriage divided her as little from her family as could wellbe contrived, without rendering the cottage at Barton entirely useless,for her mother and sisters spent much more than half their time withher.  Mrs. Dashwood was acting on motives of policy as well as pleasurein the frequency of her visits at Delaford; for her wish of bringingMarianne and Colonel Brandon together was hardly less earnest, thoughrather more liberal than what John had expressed.  It was now herdarling object.  Precious as was the company of her daughter to her,she desired nothing so much as to give up its constant enjoyment to hervalued friend; and to see Marianne settled at the mansion-house wasequally the wish of Edward and Elinor.  They each felt his sorrows, andtheir own obligations, and Marianne, by general consent, was to be thereward of all.With such a confederacy against her--with a knowledge so intimate ofhis goodness--with a conviction of his fond attachment to herself,which at last, though long after it was observable to everybodyelse--burst on her--what could she do?Marianne Dashwood was born to an extraordinary fate.  She was born todiscover the falsehood of her own opinions, and to counteract, by herconduct, her most favourite maxims.  She was born to overcome anaffection formed so late in life as at seventeen, and with no sentimentsuperior to strong esteem and lively friendship, voluntarily to giveher hand to another!--and THAT other, a man who had suffered no lessthan herself under the event of a former attachment, whom, two yearsbefore, she had considered too old to be married,--and who still soughtthe constitutional safeguard of a flannel waistcoat!But so it was.  Instead of falling a sacrifice to an irresistiblepassion, as once she had fondly flattered herself with expecting,--insteadof remaining even for ever with her mother, and finding her onlypleasures in retirement and study, as afterwards in her more calm andsober judgment she had determined on,--she found herself at nineteen,submitting to new attachments, entering on new duties, placed in a newhome, a wife, the mistress of a family, and the patroness of a village.Colonel Brandon was now as happy, as all those who best loved him,believed he deserved to be;--in Marianne he was consoled for every pastaffliction;--her regard and her society restored his mind to animation,and his spirits to cheerfulness; and that Marianne found her ownhappiness in forming his, was equally the persuasion and delight ofeach observing friend.  Marianne could never love by halves; and herwhole heart became, in time, as much devoted to her husband, as it hadonce been to Willoughby.Willoughby could not hear of her marriage without a pang; and hispunishment was soon afterwards complete in the voluntary forgiveness ofMrs. Smith, who, by stating his marriage with a woman of character, asthe source of her clemency, gave him reason for believing that had hebehaved with honour towards Marianne, he might at once have been happyand rich.  That his repentance of misconduct, which thus brought itsown punishment, was sincere, need not be doubted;--nor that he longthought of Colonel Brandon with envy, and of Marianne with regret.  Butthat he was for ever inconsolable, that he fled from society, orcontracted an habitual gloom of temper, or died of a broken heart, mustnot be depended on--for he did neither.  He lived to exert, andfrequently to enjoy himself.  His wife was not always out of humour,nor his home always uncomfortable; and in his breed of horses and dogs,and in sporting of every kind, he found no inconsiderable degree ofdomestic felicity.For Marianne, however--in spite of his incivility in surviving herloss--he always retained that decided regard which interested him inevery thing that befell her, and made her his secret standard ofperfection in woman;--and many a rising beauty would be slighted by himin after-days as bearing no comparison with Mrs. Brandon.Mrs. Dashwood was prudent enough to remain at the cottage, withoutattempting a removal to Delaford; and fortunately for Sir John and Mrs.Jennings, when Marianne was taken from them, Margaret had reached anage highly suitable for dancing, and not very ineligible for beingsupposed to have a lover.Between Barton and Delaford, there was that constant communicationwhich strong family affection would naturally dictate;--and among themerits and the happiness of Elinor and Marianne, let it not be rankedas the least considerable, that though sisters, and living almostwithin sight of each other, they could live without disagreementbetween themselves, or producing coolness between their husbands.
