The family of Dashwood had long been settled in Sussex.  Their estatewas large, and their residence was at Norland Park, in the centre oftheir property, where, for many generations, they had lived in sorespectable a manner as to engage the general good opinion of theirsurrounding acquaintance.  The late owner of this estate was a singleman, who lived to a very advanced age, and who for many years of hislife, had a constant companion and housekeeper in his sister.  But herdeath, which happened ten years before his own, produced a greatalteration in his home; for to supply her loss, he invited and receivedinto his house the family of his nephew Mr. Henry Dashwood, the legalinheritor of the Norland estate, and the person to whom he intended tobequeath it.  In the society of his nephew and niece, and theirchildren, the old Gentleman's days were comfortably spent.  Hisattachment to them all increased.  The constant attention of Mr. andMrs. Henry Dashwood to his wishes, which proceeded not merely frominterest, but from goodness of heart, gave him every degree of solidcomfort which his age could receive; and the cheerfulness of thechildren added a relish to his existence.By a former marriage, Mr. Henry Dashwood had one son: by his presentlady, three daughters.  The son, a steady respectable young man, wasamply provided for by the fortune of his mother, which had been large,and half of which devolved on him on his coming of age.  By his ownmarriage, likewise, which happened soon afterwards, he added to hiswealth.  To him therefore the succession to the Norland estate was notso really important as to his sisters; for their fortune, independentof what might arise to them from their father's inheriting thatproperty, could be but small.  Their mother had nothing, and theirfather only seven thousand pounds in his own disposal; for theremaining moiety of his first wife's fortune was also secured to herchild, and he had only a life-interest in it.The old gentleman died: his will was read, and like almost every otherwill, gave as much disappointment as pleasure.  He was neither sounjust, nor so ungrateful, as to leave his estate from his nephew;--buthe left it to him on such terms as destroyed half the value of thebequest.  Mr. Dashwood had wished for it more for the sake of his wifeand daughters than for himself or his son;--but to his son, and hisson's son, a child of four years old, it was secured, in such a way, asto leave to himself no power of providing for those who were most dearto him, and who most needed a provision by any charge on the estate, orby any sale of its valuable woods.  The whole was tied up for thebenefit of this child, who, in occasional visits with his father andmother at Norland, had so far gained on the affections of his uncle, bysuch attractions as are by no means unusual in children of two or threeyears old; an imperfect articulation, an earnest desire of having hisown way, many cunning tricks, and a great deal of noise, as to outweighall the value of all the attention which, for years, he had receivedfrom his niece and her daughters.  He meant not to be unkind, however,and, as a mark of his affection for the three girls, he left them athousand pounds a-piece.Mr. Dashwood's disappointment was, at first, severe; but his temper wascheerful and sanguine; and he might reasonably hope to live many years,and by living economically, lay by a considerable sum from the produceof an estate already large, and capable of almost immediateimprovement.  But the fortune, which had been so tardy in coming, washis only one twelvemonth.  He survived his uncle no longer; and tenthousand pounds, including the late legacies, was all that remained forhis widow and daughters.His son was sent for as soon as his danger was known, and to him Mr.Dashwood recommended, with all the strength and urgency which illnesscould command, the interest of his mother-in-law and sisters.Mr. John Dashwood had not the strong feelings of the rest of thefamily; but he was affected by a recommendation of such a nature atsuch a time, and he promised to do every thing in his power to makethem comfortable.  His father was rendered easy by such an assurance,and Mr. John Dashwood had then leisure to consider how much there mightprudently be in his power to do for them.He was not an ill-disposed young man, unless to be rather cold heartedand rather selfish is to be ill-disposed: but he was, in general, wellrespected; for he conducted himself with propriety in the discharge ofhis ordinary duties.  Had he married a more amiable woman, he mighthave been made still more respectable than he was:--he might even havebeen made amiable himself; for he was very young when he married, andvery fond of his wife.  But Mrs. John Dashwood was a strong caricatureof himself;--more narrow-minded and selfish.When he gave his promise to his father, he meditated within himself toincrease the fortunes of his sisters by the present of a thousandpounds a-piece.  He then really thought himself equal to it.  Theprospect of four thousand a-year, in addition to his present income,besides the remaining half of his own mother's fortune, warmed hisheart, and made him feel capable of generosity.-- "Yes, he would givethem three thousand pounds: it would be liberal and handsome! It wouldbe enough to make them completely easy.  Three thousand pounds! hecould spare so considerable a sum with little inconvenience."-- Hethought of it all day long, and for many days successively, and he didnot repent.No sooner was his father's funeral over, than Mrs. John Dashwood,without sending any notice of her intention to her mother-in-law,arrived with her child and their attendants.  No one could dispute herright to come; the house was her husband's from the moment of hisfather's decease; but the indelicacy of her conduct was so much thegreater, and to a woman in Mrs. Dashwood's situation, with only commonfeelings, must have been highly unpleasing;--but in HER mind there wasa sense of honor so keen, a generosity so romantic, that any offence ofthe kind, by whomsoever given or received, was to her a source ofimmovable disgust.  Mrs. John Dashwood had never been a favourite withany of her husband's family; but she had had no opportunity, till thepresent, of shewing them with how little attention to the comfort ofother people she could act when occasion required it.So acutely did Mrs. Dashwood feel this ungracious behaviour, and soearnestly did she despise her daughter-in-law for it, that, on thearrival of the latter, she would have quitted the house for ever, hadnot the entreaty of her eldest girl induced her first to reflect on thepropriety of going, and her own tender love for all her three childrendetermined her afterwards to stay, and for their sakes avoid a breachwith their brother.Elinor, this eldest daughter, whose advice was so effectual, possesseda strength of understanding, and coolness of judgment, which qualifiedher, though only nineteen, to be the counsellor of her mother, andenabled her frequently to counteract, to the advantage of them all,that eagerness of mind in Mrs. Dashwood which must generally have ledto imprudence.  She had an excellent heart;--her disposition wasaffectionate, and her feelings were strong; but she knew how to governthem: it was a knowledge which her mother had yet to learn; and whichone of her sisters had resolved never to be taught.Marianne's abilities were, in many respects, quite equal to Elinor's.She was sensible and clever; but eager in everything: her sorrows, herjoys, could have no moderation.  She was generous, amiable,interesting: she was everything but prudent.  The resemblance betweenher and her mother was strikingly great.Elinor saw, with concern, the excess of her sister's sensibility; butby Mrs. Dashwood it was valued and cherished.  They encouraged eachother now in the violence of their affliction.  The agony of griefwhich overpowered them at first, was voluntarily renewed, was soughtfor, was created again and again.  They gave themselves up wholly totheir sorrow, seeking increase of wretchedness in every reflection thatcould afford it, and resolved against ever admitting consolation infuture.  Elinor, too, was deeply afflicted; but still she couldstruggle, she could exert herself.  She could consult with her brother,could receive her sister-in-law on her arrival, and treat her withproper attention; and could strive to rouse her mother to similarexertion, and encourage her to similar forbearance.Margaret, the other sister, was a good-humored, well-disposed girl; butas she had already imbibed a good deal of Marianne's romance, withouthaving much of her sense, she did not, at thirteen, bid fair to equalher sisters at a more advanced period of life.Mrs. John Dashwood now installed herself mistress of Norland; and hermother and sisters-in-law were degraded to the condition of visitors.As such, however, they were treated by her with quiet civility; and byher husband with as much kindness as he could feel towards anybodybeyond himself, his wife, and their child.  He really pressed them,with some earnestness, to consider Norland as their home; and, as noplan appeared so eligible to Mrs. Dashwood as remaining there till shecould accommodate herself with a house in the neighbourhood, hisinvitation was accepted.A continuance in a place where everything reminded her of formerdelight, was exactly what suited her mind.  In seasons of cheerfulness,no temper could be more cheerful than hers, or possess, in a greaterdegree, that sanguine expectation of happiness which is happinessitself.  But in sorrow she must be equally carried away by her fancy,and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure she was beyond alloy.Mrs. John Dashwood did not at all approve of what her husband intendedto do for his sisters.  To take three thousand pounds from the fortuneof their dear little boy would be impoverishing him to the mostdreadful degree.  She begged him to think again on the subject.  Howcould he answer it to himself to rob his child, and his only child too,of so large a sum?  And what possible claim could the Miss Dashwoods,who were related to him only by half blood, which she considered as norelationship at all, have on his generosity to so large an amount.  Itwas very well known that no affection was ever supposed to existbetween the children of any man by different marriages; and why was heto ruin himself, and their poor little Harry, by giving away all hismoney to his half sisters?"It was my father's last request to me," replied her husband, "that Ishould assist his widow and daughters.""He did not know what he was talking of, I dare say; ten to one but hewas light-headed at the time.  Had he been in his right senses, hecould not have thought of such a thing as begging you to give away halfyour fortune from your own child.""He did not stipulate for any particular sum, my dear Fanny; he onlyrequested me, in general terms, to assist them, and make theirsituation more comfortable than it was in his power to do.  Perhaps itwould have been as well if he had left it wholly to myself.  He couldhardly suppose I should neglect them.  But as he required the promise,I could not do less than give it; at least I thought so at the time.The promise, therefore, was given, and must be performed.  Somethingmust be done for them whenever they leave Norland and settle in a newhome.""Well, then, LET something be done for them; but THAT something neednot be three thousand pounds.  Consider," she added, "that when themoney is once parted with, it never can return.  Your sisters willmarry, and it will be gone for ever.  If, indeed, it could be restoredto our poor little boy--""Why, to be sure," said her husband, very gravely, "that would makegreat difference.  The time may come when Harry will regret that solarge a sum was parted with.  If he should have a numerous family, forinstance, it would be a very convenient addition.""To be sure it would.""Perhaps, then, it would be better for all parties, if the sum werediminished one half.--Five hundred pounds would be a prodigiousincrease to their fortunes!""Oh! beyond anything great!  What brother on earth would do half somuch for his sisters, even if REALLY his sisters!  And as it is--onlyhalf blood!--But you have such a generous spirit!""I would not wish to do any thing mean," he replied.  "One had rather,on such occasions, do too much than too little.  No one, at least, canthink I have not done enough for them: even themselves, they can hardlyexpect more.""There is no knowing what THEY may expect," said the lady, "but we arenot to think of their expectations: the question is, what you canafford to do.""Certainly--and I think I may afford to give them five hundred poundsa-piece.  As it is, without any addition of mine, they will each haveabout three thousand pounds on their mother's death--a very comfortablefortune for any young woman.""To be sure it is; and, indeed, it strikes me that they can want noaddition at all.  They will have ten thousand pounds divided amongstthem.  If they marry, they will be sure of doing well, and if they donot, they may all live very comfortably together on the interest of tenthousand pounds.""That is very true, and, therefore, I do not know whether, upon thewhole, it would not be more advisable to do something for their motherwhile she lives, rather than for them--something of the annuity kind Imean.--My sisters would feel the good effects of it as well as herself.A hundred a year would make them all perfectly comfortable."His wife hesitated a little, however, in giving her consent to thisplan."To be sure," said she, "it is better than parting with fifteen hundredpounds at once.  But, then, if Mrs. Dashwood should live fifteen yearswe shall be completely taken in.""Fifteen years! my dear Fanny; her life cannot be worth half thatpurchase.""Certainly not; but if you observe, people always live for ever whenthere is an annuity to be paid them; and she is very stout and healthy,and hardly forty.  An annuity is a very serious business; it comes overand over every year, and there is no getting rid of it.  You are notaware of what you are doing.  I have known a great deal of the troubleof annuities; for my mother was clogged with the payment of three toold superannuated servants by my father's will, and it is amazing howdisagreeable she found it.  Twice every year these annuities were to bepaid; and then there was the trouble of getting it to them; and thenone of them was said to have died, and afterwards it turned out to beno such thing.  My mother was quite sick of it.  Her income was not herown, she said, with such perpetual claims on it; and it was the moreunkind in my father, because, otherwise, the money would have beenentirely at my mother's disposal, without any restriction whatever.  Ithas given me such an abhorrence of annuities, that I am sure I wouldnot pin myself down to the payment of one for all the world.""It is certainly an unpleasant thing," replied Mr. Dashwood, "to havethose kind of yearly drains on one's income.  One's fortune, as yourmother justly says, is NOT one's own.  To be tied down to the regularpayment of such a sum, on every rent day, is by no means desirable: ittakes away one's independence.""Undoubtedly; and after all you have no thanks for it.  They thinkthemselves secure, you do no more than what is expected, and it raisesno gratitude at all.  If I were you, whatever I did should be done atmy own discretion entirely.  I would not bind myself to allow them anything yearly.  It may be very inconvenient some years to spare ahundred, or even fifty pounds from our own expenses.""I believe you are right, my love; it will be better that there shouldbe no annuity in the case; whatever I may give them occasionally willbe of far greater assistance than a yearly allowance, because theywould only enlarge their style of living if they felt sure of a largerincome, and would not be sixpence the richer for it at the end of theyear.  It will certainly be much the best way.  A present of fiftypounds, now and then, will prevent their ever being distressed formoney, and will, I think, be amply discharging my promise to my father.""To be sure it will.  Indeed, to say the truth, I am convinced withinmyself that your father had no idea of your giving them any money atall.  The assistance he thought of, I dare say, was only such as mightbe reasonably expected of you; for instance, such as looking out for acomfortable small house for them, helping them to move their things,and sending them presents of fish and game, and so forth, whenever theyare in season.  I'll lay my life that he meant nothing farther; indeed,it would be very strange and unreasonable if he did.  Do but consider,my dear Mr. Dashwood, how excessively comfortable your mother-in-lawand her daughters may live on the interest of seven thousand pounds,besides the thousand pounds belonging to each of the girls, whichbrings them in fifty pounds a year a-piece, and, of course, they willpay their mother for their board out of it.  Altogether, they will havefive hundred a-year amongst them, and what on earth can four women wantfor more than that?--They will live so cheap! Their housekeeping willbe nothing at all.  They will have no carriage, no horses, and hardlyany servants; they will keep no company, and can have no expenses ofany kind!  Only conceive how comfortable they will be!  Five hundred ayear! I am sure I cannot imagine how they will spend half of it; and asto your giving them more, it is quite absurd to think of it.  They willbe much more able to give YOU something.""Upon my word," said Mr. Dashwood, "I believe you are perfectly right.My father certainly could mean nothing more by his request to me thanwhat you say.  I clearly understand it now, and I will strictly fulfilmy engagement by such acts of assistance and kindness to them as youhave described.  When my mother removes into another house my servicesshall be readily given to accommodate her as far as I can.  Some littlepresent of furniture too may be acceptable then.""Certainly," returned Mrs. John Dashwood.  "But, however, ONE thingmust be considered.  When your father and mother moved to Norland,though the furniture of Stanhill was sold, all the china, plate, andlinen was saved, and is now left to your mother.  Her house willtherefore be almost completely fitted up as soon as she takes it.""That is a material consideration undoubtedly.  A valuable legacyindeed! And yet some of the plate would have been a very pleasantaddition to our own stock here.""Yes; and the set of breakfast china is twice as handsome as whatbelongs to this house.  A great deal too handsome, in my opinion, forany place THEY can ever afford to live in.  But, however, so it is.Your father thought only of THEM.  And I must say this: that you owe noparticular gratitude to him, nor attention to his wishes; for we verywell know that if he could, he would have left almost everything in theworld to THEM."This argument was irresistible.  It gave to his intentions whatever ofdecision was wanting before; and he finally resolved, that it would beabsolutely unnecessary, if not highly indecorous, to do more for thewidow and children of his father, than such kind of neighbourly acts ashis own wife pointed out.Mrs. Dashwood remained at Norland several months; not from anydisinclination to move when the sight of every well known spot ceasedto raise the violent emotion which it produced for a while; for whenher spirits began to revive, and her mind became capable of some otherexertion than that of heightening its affliction by melancholyremembrances, she was impatient to be gone, and indefatigable in herinquiries for a suitable dwelling in the neighbourhood of Norland; forto remove far from that beloved spot was impossible.  But she couldhear of no situation that at once answered her notions of comfort andease, and suited the prudence of her eldest daughter, whose steadierjudgment rejected several houses as too large for their income, whichher mother would have approved.Mrs. Dashwood had been informed by her husband of the solemn promise onthe part of his son in their favour, which gave comfort to his lastearthly reflections.  She doubted the sincerity of this assurance nomore than he had doubted it himself, and she thought of it for herdaughters' sake with satisfaction, though as for herself she waspersuaded that a much smaller provision than 7000L would support her inaffluence.  For their brother's sake, too, for the sake of his ownheart, she rejoiced; and she reproached herself for being unjust to hismerit before, in believing him incapable of generosity.  His attentivebehaviour to herself and his sisters convinced her that their welfarewas dear to him, and, for a long time, she firmly relied on theliberality of his intentions.The contempt which she had, very early in their acquaintance, felt forher daughter-in-law, was very much increased by the farther knowledgeof her character, which half a year's residence in her family afforded;and perhaps in spite of every consideration of politeness or maternalaffection on the side of the former, the two ladies might have found itimpossible to have lived together so long, had not a particularcircumstance occurred to give still greater eligibility, according tothe opinions of Mrs. Dashwood, to her daughters' continuance at Norland.This circumstance was a growing attachment between her eldest girl andthe brother of Mrs. John Dashwood, a gentleman-like and pleasing youngman, who was introduced to their acquaintance soon after his sister'sestablishment at Norland, and who had since spent the greatest part ofhis time there.Some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy from motives ofinterest, for Edward Ferrars was the eldest son of a man who had diedvery rich; and some might have repressed it from motives of prudence,for, except a trifling sum, the whole of his fortune depended on thewill of his mother.  But Mrs. Dashwood was alike uninfluenced by eitherconsideration.  It was enough for her that he appeared to be amiable,that he loved her daughter, and that Elinor returned the partiality.It was contrary to every doctrine of hers that difference of fortuneshould keep any couple asunder who were attracted by resemblance ofdisposition; and that Elinor's merit should not be acknowledged byevery one who knew her, was to her comprehension impossible.Edward Ferrars was not recommended to their good opinion by anypeculiar graces of person or address.  He was not handsome, and hismanners required intimacy to make them pleasing.  He was too diffidentto do justice to himself; but when his natural shyness was overcome,his behaviour gave every indication of an open, affectionate heart.His understanding was good, and his education had given it solidimprovement.  But he was neither fitted by abilities nor disposition toanswer the wishes of his mother and sister, who longed to see himdistinguished--as--they hardly knew what.  They wanted him to make afine figure in the world in some manner or other.  His mother wished tointerest him in political concerns, to get him into parliament, or tosee him connected with some of the great men of the day.  Mrs. JohnDashwood wished it likewise; but in the mean while, till one of thesesuperior blessings could be attained, it would have quieted herambition to see him driving a barouche.  But Edward had no turn forgreat men or barouches.  All his wishes centered in domestic comfortand the quiet of private life.  Fortunately he had a younger brotherwho was more promising.Edward had been staying several weeks in the house before he engagedmuch of Mrs. Dashwood's attention; for she was, at that time, in suchaffliction as rendered her careless of surrounding objects.  She sawonly that he was quiet and unobtrusive, and she liked him for it.  Hedid not disturb the wretchedness of her mind by ill-timed conversation.She was first called to observe and approve him farther, by areflection which Elinor chanced one day to make on the differencebetween him and his sister.  It was a contrast which recommended himmost forcibly to her mother."It is enough," said she; "to say that he is unlike Fanny is enough.It implies everything amiable.  I love him already.""I think you will like him," said Elinor, "when you know more of him.""Like him!" replied her mother with a smile.  "I feel no sentiment ofapprobation inferior to love.""You may esteem him.""I have never yet known what it was to separate esteem and love."Mrs. Dashwood now took pains to get acquainted with him.  Her mannerswere attaching, and soon banished his reserve.  She speedilycomprehended all his merits; the persuasion of his regard for Elinorperhaps assisted her penetration; but she really felt assured of hisworth: and even that quietness of manner, which militated against allher established ideas of what a young man's address ought to be, was nolonger uninteresting when she knew his heart to be warm and his temperaffectionate.No sooner did she perceive any symptom of love in his behaviour toElinor, than she considered their serious attachment as certain, andlooked forward to their marriage as rapidly approaching."In a few months, my dear Marianne." said she, "Elinor will, in allprobability be settled for life.  We shall miss her; but SHE will behappy.""Oh! Mama, how shall we do without her?""My love, it will be scarcely a separation.  We shall live within a fewmiles of each other, and shall meet every day of our lives.  You willgain a brother, a real, affectionate brother.  I have the highestopinion in the world of Edward's heart.  But you look grave, Marianne;do you disapprove your sister's choice?""Perhaps," said Marianne, "I may consider it with some surprise.Edward is very amiable, and I love him tenderly.  But yet--he is notthe kind of young man--there is something wanting--his figure is notstriking; it has none of that grace which I should expect in the manwho could seriously attach my sister.  His eyes want all that spirit,that fire, which at once announce virtue and intelligence.  And besidesall this, I am afraid, Mama, he has no real taste.  Music seemsscarcely to attract him, and though he admires Elinor's drawings verymuch, it is not the admiration of a person who can understand theirworth.  It is evident, in spite of his frequent attention to her whileshe draws, that in fact he knows nothing of the matter.  He admires asa lover, not as a connoisseur.  To satisfy me, those characters must beunited.  I could not be happy with a man whose taste did not in everypoint coincide with my own.  He must enter into all my feelings; thesame books, the same music must charm us both.  Oh! mama, howspiritless, how tame was Edward's manner in reading to us last night!I felt for my sister most severely.  Yet she bore it with so muchcomposure, she seemed scarcely to notice it.  I could hardly keep myseat.  To hear those beautiful lines which have frequently almostdriven me wild, pronounced with such impenetrable calmness, suchdreadful indifference!""He would certainly have done more justice to simple and elegant prose.I thought so at the time; but you WOULD give him Cowper.""Nay, Mama, if he is not to be animated by Cowper!--but we must allowfor difference of taste.  Elinor has not my feelings, and therefore shemay overlook it, and be happy with him.  But it would have broke MYheart, had I loved him, to hear him read with so little sensibility.Mama, the more I know of the world, the more am I convinced that Ishall never see a man whom I can really love.  I require so much!  Hemust have all Edward's virtues, and his person and manners mustornament his goodness with every possible charm.""Remember, my love, that you are not seventeen.  It is yet too early inlife to despair of such a happiness.  Why should you be less fortunatethan your mother?  In one circumstance only, my Marianne, may yourdestiny be different from hers!""What a pity it is, Elinor," said Marianne, "that Edward should have notaste for drawing.""No taste for drawing!" replied Elinor, "why should you think so? Hedoes not draw himself, indeed, but he has great pleasure in seeing theperformances of other people, and I assure you he is by no meansdeficient in natural taste, though he has not had opportunities ofimproving it.  Had he ever been in the way of learning, I think hewould have drawn very well.  He distrusts his own judgment in suchmatters so much, that he is always unwilling to give his opinion on anypicture; but he has an innate propriety and simplicity of taste, whichin general direct him perfectly right."Marianne was afraid of offending, and said no more on the subject; butthe kind of approbation which Elinor described as excited in him by thedrawings of other people, was very far from that rapturous delight,which, in her opinion, could alone be called taste.  Yet, thoughsmiling within herself at the mistake, she honoured her sister for thatblind partiality to Edward which produced it."I hope, Marianne," continued Elinor, "you do not consider him asdeficient in general taste.  Indeed, I think I may say that you cannot,for your behaviour to him is perfectly cordial, and if THAT were youropinion, I am sure you could never be civil to him."Marianne hardly knew what to say.  She would not wound the feelings ofher sister on any account, and yet to say what she did not believe wasimpossible.  At length she replied:"Do not be offended, Elinor, if my praise of him is not in every thingequal to your sense of his merits.  I have not had so manyopportunities of estimating the minuter propensities of his mind, hisinclinations and tastes, as you have; but I have the highest opinion inthe world of his goodness and sense.  I think him every thing that isworthy and amiable.""I am sure," replied Elinor, with a smile, "that his dearest friendscould not be dissatisfied with such commendation as that.  I do notperceive how you could express yourself more warmly."Marianne was rejoiced to find her sister so easily pleased."Of his sense and his goodness," continued Elinor, "no one can, Ithink, be in doubt, who has seen him often enough to engage him inunreserved conversation.  The excellence of his understanding and hisprinciples can be concealed only by that shyness which too often keepshim silent.  You know enough of him to do justice to his solid worth.But of his minuter propensities, as you call them you have frompeculiar circumstances been kept more ignorant than myself.  He and Ihave been at times thrown a good deal together, while you have beenwholly engrossed on the most affectionate principle by my mother.  Ihave seen a great deal of him, have studied his sentiments and heardhis opinion on subjects of literature and taste; and, upon the whole, Iventure to pronounce that his mind is well-informed, enjoyment of booksexceedingly great, his imagination lively, his observation just andcorrect, and his taste delicate and pure.  His abilities in everyrespect improve as much upon acquaintance as his manners and person.At first sight, his address is certainly not striking; and his personcan hardly be called handsome, till the expression of his eyes, whichare uncommonly good, and the general sweetness of his countenance, isperceived.  At present, I know him so well, that I think him reallyhandsome; or at least, almost so.  What say you, Marianne?""I shall very soon think him handsome, Elinor, if I do not now.  Whenyou tell me to love him as a brother, I shall no more see imperfectionin his face, than I now do in his heart."Elinor started at this declaration, and was sorry for the warmth shehad been betrayed into, in speaking of him.  She felt that Edward stoodvery high in her opinion.  She believed the regard to be mutual; butshe required greater certainty of it to make Marianne's conviction oftheir attachment agreeable to her.  She knew that what Marianne and hermother conjectured one moment, they believed the next--that with them,to wish was to hope, and to hope was to expect.  She tried to explainthe real state of the case to her sister."I do not attempt to deny," said she, "that I think very highly ofhim--that I greatly esteem, that I like him."Marianne here burst forth with indignation--"Esteem him! Like him! Cold-hearted Elinor! Oh!  worse thancold-hearted! Ashamed of being otherwise.  Use those words again, and Iwill leave the room this moment."Elinor could not help laughing.  "Excuse me," said she; "and be assuredthat I meant no offence to you, by speaking, in so quiet a way, of myown feelings.  Believe them to be stronger than I have declared;believe them, in short, to be such as his merit, and the suspicion--thehope of his affection for me may warrant, without imprudence or folly.But farther than this you must not believe.  I am by no means assuredof his regard for me.  There are moments when the extent of it seemsdoubtful; and till his sentiments are fully known, you cannot wonder atmy wishing to avoid any encouragement of my own partiality, bybelieving or calling it more than it is.  In my heart I feellittle--scarcely any doubt of his preference.  But there are otherpoints to be considered besides his inclination.  He is very far frombeing independent.  What his mother really is we cannot know; but, fromFanny's occasional mention of her conduct and opinions, we have neverbeen disposed to think her amiable; and I am very much mistaken ifEdward is not himself aware that there would be many difficulties inhis way, if he were to wish to marry a woman who had not either a greatfortune or high rank."Marianne was astonished to find how much the imagination of her motherand herself had outstripped the truth."And you really are not engaged to him!" said she.  "Yet it certainlysoon will happen.  But two advantages will proceed from this delay.  Ishall not lose you so soon, and Edward will have greater opportunity ofimproving that natural taste for your favourite pursuit which must beso indispensably necessary to your future felicity.  Oh! if he shouldbe so far stimulated by your genius as to learn to draw himself, howdelightful it would be!"Elinor had given her real opinion to her sister.  She could notconsider her partiality for Edward in so prosperous a state as Mariannehad believed it.  There was, at times, a want of spirits about himwhich, if it did not denote indifference, spoke of something almost asunpromising.  A doubt of her regard, supposing him to feel it, need notgive him more than inquietude.  It would not be likely to produce thatdejection of mind which frequently attended him.  A more reasonablecause might be found in the dependent situation which forbade theindulgence of his affection.  She knew that his mother neither behavedto him so as to make his home comfortable at present, nor to give himany assurance that he might form a home for himself, without strictlyattending to her views for his aggrandizement.  With such a knowledgeas this, it was impossible for Elinor to feel easy on the subject.  Shewas far from depending on that result of his preference of her, whichher mother and sister still considered as certain.  Nay, the longerthey were together the more doubtful seemed the nature of his regard;and sometimes, for a few painful minutes, she believed it to be no morethan friendship.But, whatever might really be its limits, it was enough, when perceivedby his sister, to make her uneasy, and at the same time, (which wasstill more common,) to make her uncivil.  She took the firstopportunity of affronting her mother-in-law on the occasion, talking toher so expressively of her brother's great expectations, of Mrs.Ferrars's resolution that both her sons should marry well, and of thedanger attending any young woman who attempted to DRAW HIM IN; thatMrs. Dashwood could neither pretend to be unconscious, nor endeavor tobe calm.  She gave her an answer which marked her contempt, andinstantly left the room, resolving that, whatever might be theinconvenience or expense of so sudden a removal, her beloved Elinorshould not be exposed another week to such insinuations.In this state of her spirits, a letter was delivered to her from thepost, which contained a proposal particularly well timed.  It was theoffer of a small house, on very easy terms, belonging to a relation ofher own, a gentleman of consequence and property in Devonshire.  Theletter was from this gentleman himself, and written in the true spiritof friendly accommodation.  He understood that she was in need of adwelling; and though the house he now offered her was merely a cottage,he assured her that everything should be done to it which she mightthink necessary, if the situation pleased her.  He earnestly pressedher, after giving the particulars of the house and garden, to come withher daughters to Barton Park, the place of his own residence, fromwhence she might judge, herself, whether Barton Cottage, for the houseswere in the same parish, could, by any alteration, be made comfortableto her.  He seemed really anxious to accommodate them and the whole ofhis letter was written in so friendly a style as could not fail ofgiving pleasure to his cousin; more especially at a moment when she wassuffering under the cold and unfeeling behaviour of her nearerconnections.  She needed no time for deliberation or inquiry.  Herresolution was formed as she read.  The situation of Barton, in acounty so far distant from Sussex as Devonshire, which, but a few hoursbefore, would have been a sufficient objection to outweigh everypossible advantage belonging to the place, was now its firstrecommendation.  To quit the neighbourhood of Norland was no longer anevil; it was an object of desire; it was a blessing, in comparison ofthe misery of continuing her daughter-in-law's guest; and to remove forever from that beloved place would be less painful than to inhabit orvisit it while such a woman was its mistress.  She instantly wrote SirJohn Middleton her acknowledgment of his kindness, and her acceptanceof his proposal; and then hastened to shew both letters to herdaughters, that she might be secure of their approbation before heranswer were sent.Elinor had always thought it would be more prudent for them to settleat some distance from Norland, than immediately amongst their presentacquaintance.  On THAT head, therefore, it was not for her to opposeher mother's intention of removing into Devonshire.  The house, too, asdescribed by Sir John, was on so simple a scale, and the rent souncommonly moderate, as to leave her no right of objection on eitherpoint; and, therefore, though it was not a plan which brought any charmto her fancy, though it was a removal from the vicinity of Norlandbeyond her wishes, she made no attempt to dissuade her mother fromsending a letter of acquiescence.No sooner was her answer dispatched, than Mrs. Dashwood indulged herselfin the pleasure of announcing to her son-in-law and his wife that shewas provided with a house, and should incommode them no longer than tillevery thing were ready for her inhabiting it. They heard her withsurprise. Mrs. John Dashwood said nothing; but her husband civilly hopedthat she would not be settled far from Norland. She had greatsatisfaction in replying that she was going into Devonshire.--Edwardturned hastily towards her, on hearing this, and, in a voice of surpriseand concern, which required no explanation to her, repeated,"Devonshire! Are you, indeed, going there? So far from hence! And towhat part of it?" She explained the situation. It was within four milesnorthward of Exeter."It is but a cottage," she continued, "but I hope to see many of myfriends in it.  A room or two can easily be added; and if my friendsfind no difficulty in travelling so far to see me, I am sure I willfind none in accommodating them."She concluded with a very kind invitation to Mr. and Mrs. John Dashwoodto visit her at Barton; and to Edward she gave one with still greateraffection.  Though her late conversation with her daughter-in-law hadmade her resolve on remaining at Norland no longer than wasunavoidable, it had not produced the smallest effect on her in thatpoint to which it principally tended.  To separate Edward and Elinorwas as far from being her object as ever; and she wished to show Mrs.John Dashwood, by this pointed invitation to her brother, how totallyshe disregarded her disapprobation of the match.Mr. John Dashwood told his mother again and again how exceedingly sorryhe was that she had taken a house at such a distance from Norland as toprevent his being of any service to her in removing her furniture.  Hereally felt conscientiously vexed on the occasion; for the veryexertion to which he had limited the performance of his promise to hisfather was by this arrangement rendered impracticable.-- The furniturewas all sent around by water.  It chiefly consisted of household linen,plate, china, and books, with a handsome pianoforte of Marianne's.Mrs. John Dashwood saw the packages depart with a sigh: she could nothelp feeling it hard that as Mrs. Dashwood's income would be sotrifling in comparison with their own, she should have any handsomearticle of furniture.Mrs. Dashwood took the house for a twelvemonth; it was ready furnished,and she might have immediate possession.  No difficulty arose on eitherside in the agreement; and she waited only for the disposal of hereffects at Norland, and to determine her future household, before sheset off for the west; and this, as she was exceedingly rapid in theperformance of everything that interested her, was soon done.--Thehorses which were left her by her husband had been sold soon after hisdeath, and an opportunity now offering of disposing of her carriage,she agreed to sell that likewise at the earnest advice of her eldestdaughter.  For the comfort of her children, had she consulted only herown wishes, she would have kept it; but the discretion of Elinorprevailed.  HER wisdom too limited the number of their servants to.
