The family of Dashwood had long been settled in Sussex.  Their estatewas large, and their residence was at Norland Park, in the centre oftheir property, where, for many generations, they had lived in sorespectable a manner as to engage the general good opinion of theirsurrounding acquaintance.  The late owner of this estate was a singleman, who lived to a very advanced age, and who for many years of hislife, had a constant companion and housekeeper in his sister.  But herdeath, which happened ten years before his own, produced a greatalteration in his home; for to supply her loss, he invited and receivedinto his house the family of his nephew Mr. Henry Dashwood, the legalinheritor of the Norland estate, and the person to whom he intended tobequeath it.  In the society of his nephew and niece, and theirchildren, the old Gentleman's days were comfortably spent.  Hisattachment to them all increased.  The constant attention of Mr. andMrs. Henry Dashwood to his wishes, which proceeded not merely frominterest, but from goodness of heart, gave him every degree of solidcomfort which his age could receive; and the cheerfulness of thechildren added a relish to his existence.By a former marriage, Mr. Henry Dashwood had one son: by his presentlady, three daughters.  The son, a steady respectable young man, wasamply provided for by the fortune of his mother, which had been large,and half of which devolved on him on his coming of age.  By his ownmarriage, likewise, which happened soon afterwards, he added to hiswealth.  To him therefore the succession to the Norland estate was notso really important as to his sisters; for their fortune, independentof what might arise to them from their father's inheriting thatproperty, could be but small.  Their mother had nothing, and theirfather only seven thousand pounds in his own disposal; for theremaining moiety of his first wife's fortune was also secured to herchild, and he had only a life-interest in it.The old gentleman died: his will was read, and like almost every otherwill, gave as much disappointment as pleasure.  He was neither sounjust, nor so ungrateful, as to leave his estate from his nephew;--buthe left it to him on such terms as destroyed half the value of thebequest.  Mr. Dashwood had wished for it more for the sake of his wifeand daughters than for himself or his son;--but to his son, and hisson's son, a child of four years old, it was secured, in such a way, asto leave to himself no power of providing for those who were most dearto him, and who most needed a provision by any charge on the estate, orby any sale of its valuable woods.  The whole was tied up for thebenefit of this child, who, in occasional visits with his father andmother at Norland, had so far gained on the affections of his uncle, bysuch attractions as are by no means unusual in children of two or threeyears old; an imperfect articulation, an earnest desire of having hisown way, many cunning tricks, and a great deal of noise, as to outweighall the value of all the attention which, for years, he had receivedfrom his niece and her daughters.  He meant not to be unkind, however,and, as a mark of his affection for the three girls, he left them athousand pounds a-piece.Mr. Dashwood's disappointment was, at first, severe; but his temper wascheerful and sanguine; and he might reasonably hope to live many years,and by living economically, lay by a considerable sum from the produceof an estate already large, and capable of almost immediateimprovement.  But the fortune, which had been so tardy in coming, washis only one twelvemonth.  He survived his uncle no longer; and tenthousand pounds, including the late legacies, was all that remained forhis widow and daughters.His son was sent for as soon as his danger was known, and to him Mr.Dashwood recommended, with all the strength and urgency which illnesscould command, the interest of his mother-in-law and sisters.Mr. John Dashwood had not the strong feelings of the rest of thefamily; but he was affected by a recommendation of such a nature atsuch a time, and he promised to do every thing in his power to makethem comfortable.  His father was rendered easy by such an assurance,and Mr. John Dashwood had then leisure to consider how much there mightprudently be in his power to do for them.He was not an ill-disposed young man, unless to be rather cold heartedand rather selfish is to be ill-disposed: but he was, in general, wellrespected; for he conducted himself with propriety in the discharge ofhis ordinary duties.  Had he married a more amiable woman, he mighthave been made still more respectable than he was:--he might even havebeen made amiable himself; for he was very young when he married, andvery fond of his wife.  But Mrs. John Dashwood was a strong caricatureof himself;--more narrow-minded and selfish.When he gave his promise to his father, he meditated within himself toincrease the fortunes of his sisters by the present of a thousandpounds a-piece.  He then really thought himself equal to it.  Theprospect of four thousand a-year, in addition to his present income,besides the remaining half of his own mother's fortune, warmed hisheart, and made him feel capable of generosity.-- "Yes, he would givethem three thousand pounds: it would be liberal and handsome! It wouldbe enough to make them completely easy.  Three thousand pounds! hecould spare so considerable a sum with little inconvenience."-- Hethought of it all day long, and for many days successively, and he didnot repent.No sooner was his father's funeral over, than Mrs. John Dashwood,without sending any notice of her intention to her mother-in-law,arrived with her child and their attendants.  No one could dispute herright to come; the house was her husband's from the moment of hisfather's decease; but the indelicacy of her conduct was so much thegreater, and to a woman in Mrs. Dashwood's situation, with only commonfeelings, must have been highly unpleasing;--but in HER mind there wasa sense of honor so keen, a generosity so romantic, that any offence ofthe kind, by whomsoever given or received, was to her a source ofimmovable disgust.  Mrs. John Dashwood had never been a favourite withany of her husband's family; but she had had no opportunity, till thepresent, of shewing them with how little attention to the comfort ofother people she could act when occasion required it.So acutely did Mrs. Dashwood feel this ungracious behaviour, and soearnestly did she despise her daughter-in-law for it, that, on thearrival of the latter, she would have quitted the house for ever, hadnot the entreaty of her eldest girl induced her first to reflect on thepropriety of going, and her own tender love for all her three childrendetermined her afterwards to stay, and for their sakes avoid a breachwith their brother.Elinor, this eldest daughter, whose advice was so effectual, possesseda strength of understanding, and coolness of judgment, which qualifiedher, though only nineteen, to be the counsellor of her mother, andenabled her frequently to counteract, to the advantage of them all,that eagerness of mind in Mrs. Dashwood which must generally have ledto imprudence.  She had an excellent heart;--her disposition wasaffectionate, and her feelings were strong; but she knew how to governthem: it was a knowledge which her mother had yet to learn; and whichone of her sisters had resolved never to be taught.Marianne's abilities were, in many respects, quite equal to Elinor's.She was sensible and clever; but eager in everything: her sorrows, herjoys, could have no moderation.  She was generous, amiable,interesting: she was everything but prudent.  The resemblance betweenher and her mother was strikingly great.Elinor saw, with concern, the excess of her sister's sensibility; butby Mrs. Dashwood it was valued and cherished.  They encouraged eachother now in the violence of their affliction.  The agony of griefwhich overpowered them at first, was voluntarily renewed, was soughtfor, was created again and again.  They gave themselves up wholly totheir sorrow, seeking increase of wretchedness in every reflection thatcould afford it, and resolved against ever admitting consolation infuture.  Elinor, too, was deeply afflicted; but still she couldstruggle, she could exert herself.  She could consult with her brother,could receive her sister-in-law on her arrival, and treat her withproper attention; and could strive to rouse her mother to similarexertion, and encourage her to similar forbearance.Margaret, the other sister, was a good-humored, well-disposed girl; butas she had already imbibed a good deal of Marianne's romance, withouthaving much of her sense, she did not, at thirteen, bid fair to equalher sisters at a more advanced period of life.Mrs. John Dashwood now installed herself mistress of Norland; and hermother and sisters-in-law were degraded to the condition of visitors.As such, however, they were treated by her with quiet civility; and byher husband with as much kindness as he could feel towards anybodybeyond himself, his wife, and their child.  He really pressed them,with some earnestness, to consider Norland as their home; and, as noplan appeared so eligible to Mrs. Dashwood as remaining there till shecould accommodate herself with a house in the neighbourhood, hisinvitation was accepted.A continuance in a place where everything reminded her of formerdelight, was exactly what suited her mind.  In seasons of cheerfulness,no temper could be more cheerful than hers, or possess, in a greaterdegree, that sanguine expectation of happiness which is happinessitself.  But in sorrow she must be equally carried away by her fancy,and as far beyond consolation as in pleasure she was beyond alloy.Mrs. John Dashwood did not at all approve of what her husband intendedto do for his sisters.  To take three thousand pounds from the fortuneof their dear little boy would be impoverishing him to the mostdreadful degree.  She begged him to think again on the subject.  Howcould he answer it to himself to rob his child, and his only child too,of so large a sum?  And what possible claim could the Miss Dashwoods,who were related to him only by half blood, which she considered as norelationship at all, have on his generosity to so large an amount.  Itwas very well known that no affection was ever supposed to existbetween the children of any man by different marriages; and why was heto ruin himself, and their poor little Harry, by giving away all hismoney to his half sisters?"It was my father's last request to me," replied her husband, "that Ishould assist his widow and daughters.""He did not know what he was talking of, I dare say; ten to one but hewas light-headed at the time.  Had he been in his right senses, hecould not have thought of such a thing as begging you to give away halfyour fortune from your own child.""He did not stipulate for any particular sum, my dear Fanny; he onlyrequested me, in general terms, to assist them, and make theirsituation more comfortable than it was in his power to do.  Perhaps itwould have been as well if he had left it wholly to myself.  He couldhardly suppose I should neglect them.  But as he required the promise,I could not do less than give it; at least I thought so at the time.The promise, therefore, was given, and must be performed.  Somethingmust be done for them whenever they leave Norland and settle in a newhome.""Well, then, LET something be done for them; but THAT something neednot be three thousand pounds.  Consider," she added, "that when themoney is once parted with, it never can return.  Your sisters willmarry, and it will be gone for ever.  If, indeed, it could be restoredto our poor little boy--""Why, to be sure," said her husband, very gravely, "that would makegreat difference.  The time may come when Harry will regret that solarge a sum was parted with.  If he should have a numerous family, forinstance, it would be a very convenient addition.""To be sure it would.""Perhaps, then, it would be better for all parties, if the sum werediminished one half.--Five hundred pounds would be a prodigiousincrease to their fortunes!""Oh! beyond anything great!  What brother on earth would do half somuch for his sisters, even if REALLY his sisters!  And as it is--onlyhalf blood!--But you have such a generous spirit!""I would not wish to do any thing mean," he replied.  "One had rather,on such occasions, do too much than too little.  No one, at least, canthink I have not done enough for them: even themselves, they can hardlyexpect more.""There is no knowing what THEY may expect," said the lady, "but we arenot to think of their expectations: the question is, what you canafford to do.""Certainly--and I think I may afford to give them five hundred poundsa-piece.  As it is, without any addition of mine, they will each haveabout three thousand pounds on their mother's death--a very comfortablefortune for any young woman.""To be sure it is; and, indeed, it strikes me that they can want noaddition at all.  They will have ten thousand pounds divided amongstthem.  If they marry, they will be sure of doing well, and if they donot, they may all live very comfortably together on the interest of tenthousand pounds.""That is very true, and, therefore, I do not know whether, upon thewhole, it would not be more advisable to do something for their motherwhile she lives, rather than for them--something of the annuity kind Imean.--My sisters would feel the good effects of it as well as herself.A hundred a year would make them all perfectly comfortable."His wife hesitated a little, however, in giving her consent to thisplan."To be sure," said she, "it is better than parting with fifteen hundredpounds at once.  But, then, if Mrs. Dashwood should live fifteen yearswe shall be completely taken in.""Fifteen years! my dear Fanny; her life cannot be worth half thatpurchase.""Certainly not; but if you observe, people always live for ever whenthere is an annuity to be paid them; and she is very stout and healthy,and hardly forty.  An annuity is a very serious business; it comes overand over every year, and there is no getting rid of it.  You are notaware of what you are doing.  I have known a great deal of the troubleof annuities; for my mother was clogged with the payment of three toold superannuated servants by my father's will, and it is amazing howdisagreeable she found it.  Twice every year these annuities were to bepaid; and then there was the trouble of getting it to them; and thenone of them was said to have died, and afterwards it turned out to beno such thing.  My mother was quite sick of it.  Her income was not herown, she said, with such perpetual claims on it; and it was the moreunkind in my father, because, otherwise, the money would have beenentirely at my mother's disposal, without any restriction whatever.  Ithas given me such an abhorrence of annuities, that I am sure I wouldnot pin myself down to the payment of one for all the world.""It is certainly an unpleasant thing," replied Mr. Dashwood, "to havethose kind of yearly drains on one's income.  One's fortune, as yourmother justly says, is NOT one's own.  To be tied down to the regularpayment of such a sum, on every rent day, is by no means desirable: ittakes away one's independence.""Undoubtedly; and after all you have no thanks for it.  They thinkthemselves secure, you do no more than what is expected, and it raisesno gratitude at all.  If I were you, whatever I did should be done atmy own discretion entirely.  I would not bind myself to allow them anything yearly.  It may be very inconvenient some years to spare ahundred, or even fifty pounds from our own expenses.""I believe you are right, my love; it will be better that there shouldbe no annuity in the case; whatever I may give them occasionally willbe of far greater assistance than a yearly allowance, because theywould only enlarge their style of living if they felt sure of a largerincome, and would not be sixpence the richer for it at the end of theyear.  It will certainly be much the best way.  A present of fiftypounds, now and then, will prevent their ever being distressed formoney, and will, I think, be amply discharging my promise to my father.""To be sure it will.  Indeed, to say the truth, I am convinced withinmyself that your father had no idea of your giving them any money atall.  The assistance he thought of, I dare say, was only such as mightbe reasonably expected of you; for instance, such as looking out for acomfortable small house for them, helping them to move their things,and sending them presents of fish and game, and so forth, whenever theyare in season.  I'll lay my life that he meant nothing farther; indeed,it would be very strange and unreasonable if he did.  Do but consider,my dear Mr. Dashwood, how excessively comfortable your mother-in-lawand her daughters may live on the interest of seven thousand pounds,besides the thousand pounds belonging to each of the girls, whichbrings them in fifty pounds a year a-piece, and, of course, they willpay their mother for their board out of it.  Altogether, they will havefive hundred a-year amongst them, and what on earth can four women wantfor more than that?--They will live so cheap! Their housekeeping willbe nothing at all.  They will have no carriage, no horses, and hardlyany servants; they will keep no company, and can have no expenses ofany kind!  Only conceive how comfortable they will be!  Five hundred ayear! I am sure I cannot imagine how they will spend half of it; and asto your giving them more, it is quite absurd to think of it.  They willbe much more able to give YOU something.""Upon my word," said Mr. Dashwood, "I believe you are perfectly right.My father certainly could mean nothing more by his request to me thanwhat you say.  I clearly understand it now, and I will strictly fulfilmy engagement by such acts of assistance and kindness to them as youhave described.  When my mother removes into another house my servicesshall be readily given to accommodate her as far as I can.  Some littlepresent of furniture too may be acceptable then.""Certainly," returned Mrs. John Dashwood.  "But, however, ONE thingmust be considered.  When your father and mother moved to Norland,though the furniture of Stanhill was sold, all the china, plate, andlinen was saved, and is now left to your mother.  Her house willtherefore be almost completely fitted up as soon as she takes it.""That is a material consideration undoubtedly.  A valuable legacyindeed! And yet some of the plate would have been a very pleasantaddition to our own stock here.""Yes; and the set of breakfast china is twice as handsome as whatbelongs to this house.  A great deal too handsome, in my opinion, forany place THEY can ever afford to live in.  But, however, so it is.Your father thought only of THEM.  And I must say this: that you owe noparticular gratitude to him, nor attention to his wishes; for we verywell know that if he could, he would have left almost everything in theworld to THEM."This argument was irresistible.  It gave to his intentions whatever ofdecision was wanting before; and he finally resolved, that it would beabsolutely unnecessary, if not highly indecorous, to do more for thewidow and children of his father, than such kind of neighbourly acts ashis own wife pointed out.Mrs. Dashwood remained at Norland several months; not from anydisinclination to move when the sight of every well known spot ceasedto raise the violent emotion which it produced for a while; for whenher spirits began to revive, and her mind became capable of some otherexertion than that of heightening its affliction by melancholyremembrances, she was impatient to be gone, and indefatigable in herinquiries for a suitable dwelling in the neighbourhood of Norland; forto remove far from that beloved spot was impossible.  But she couldhear of no situation that at once answered her notions of comfort andease, and suited the prudence of her eldest daughter, whose steadierjudgment rejected several houses as too large for their income, whichher mother would have approved.Mrs. Dashwood had been informed by her husband of the solemn promise onthe part of his son in their favour, which gave comfort to his lastearthly reflections.  She doubted the sincerity of this assurance nomore than he had doubted it himself, and she thought of it for herdaughters' sake with satisfaction, though as for herself she waspersuaded that a much smaller provision than 7000L would support her inaffluence.  For their brother's sake, too, for the sake of his ownheart, she rejoiced; and she reproached herself for being unjust to hismerit before, in believing him incapable of generosity.  His attentivebehaviour to herself and his sisters convinced her that their welfarewas dear to him, and, for a long time, she firmly relied on theliberality of his intentions.The contempt which she had, very early in their acquaintance, felt forher daughter-in-law, was very much increased by the farther knowledgeof her character, which half a year's residence in her family afforded;and perhaps in spite of every consideration of politeness or maternalaffection on the side of the former, the two ladies might have found itimpossible to have lived together so long, had not a particularcircumstance occurred to give still greater eligibility, according tothe opinions of Mrs. Dashwood, to her daughters' continuance at Norland.This circumstance was a growing attachment between her eldest girl andthe brother of Mrs. John Dashwood, a gentleman-like and pleasing youngman, who was introduced to their acquaintance soon after his sister'sestablishment at Norland, and who had since spent the greatest part ofhis time there.Some mothers might have encouraged the intimacy from motives ofinterest, for Edward Ferrars was the eldest son of a man who had diedvery rich; and some might have repressed it from motives of prudence,for, except a trifling sum, the whole of his fortune depended on thewill of his mother.  But Mrs. Dashwood was alike uninfluenced by eitherconsideration.  It was enough for her that he appeared to be amiable,that he loved her daughter, and that Elinor returned the partiality.It was contrary to every doctrine of hers that difference of fortuneshould keep any couple asunder who were attracted by resemblance ofdisposition; and that Elinor's merit should not be acknowledged byevery one who knew her, was to her comprehension impossible.Edward Ferrars was not recommended to their good opinion by anypeculiar graces of person or address.  He was not handsome, and hismanners required intimacy to make them pleasing.  He was too diffidentto do justice to himself; but when his natural shyness was overcome,his behaviour gave every indication of an open, affectionate heart.His understanding was good, and his education had given it solidimprovement.  But he was neither fitted by abilities nor disposition toanswer the wishes of his mother and sister, who longed to see himdistinguished--as--they hardly knew what.  They wanted him to make afine figure in the world in some manner or other.  His mother wished tointerest him in political concerns, to get him into parliament, or tosee him connected with some of the great men of the day.  Mrs. JohnDashwood wished it likewise; but in the mean while, till one of thesesuperior blessings could be attained, it would have quieted herambition to see him driving a barouche.  But Edward had no turn forgreat men or barouches.  All his wishes centered in domestic comfortand the quiet of private life.  Fortunately he had a younger brotherwho was more promising.Edward had been staying several weeks in the house before he engagedmuch of Mrs. Dashwood's attention; for she was, at that time, in suchaffliction as rendered her careless of surrounding objects.  She sawonly that he was quiet and unobtrusive, and she liked him for it.  Hedid not disturb the wretchedness of her mind by ill-timed conversation.She was first called to observe and approve him farther, by areflection which Elinor chanced one day to make on the differencebetween him and his sister.  It was a contrast which recommended himmost forcibly to her mother."It is enough," said she; "to say that he is unlike Fanny is enough.It implies everything amiable.  I love him already.""I think you will like him," said Elinor, "when you know more of him.""Like him!" replied her mother with a smile.  "I feel no sentiment ofapprobation inferior to love.""You may esteem him.""I have never yet known what it was to separate esteem and love."Mrs. Dashwood now took pains to get acquainted with him.  Her mannerswere attaching, and soon banished his reserve.  She speedilycomprehended all his merits; the persuasion of his regard for Elinorperhaps assisted her penetration; but she really felt assured of hisworth: and even that quietness of manner, which militated against allher established ideas of what a young man's address ought to be, was nolonger uninteresting when she knew his heart to be warm and his temperaffectionate.No sooner did she perceive any symptom of love in his behaviour toElinor, than she considered their serious attachment as certain, andlooked forward to their marriage as rapidly approaching."In a few months, my dear Marianne." said she, "Elinor will, in allprobability be settled for life.  We shall miss her; but SHE will behappy.""Oh! Mama, how shall we do without her?""My love, it will be scarcely a separation.  We shall live within a fewmiles of each other, and shall meet every day of our lives.  You willgain a brother, a real, affectionate brother.  I have the highestopinion in the world of Edward's heart.  But you look grave, Marianne;do you disapprove your sister's choice?""Perhaps," said Marianne, "I may consider it with some surprise.Edward is very amiable, and I love him tenderly.  But yet--he is notthe kind of young man--there is something wanting--his figure is notstriking; it has none of that grace which I should expect in the manwho could seriously attach my sister.  His eyes want all that spirit,that fire, which at once announce virtue and intelligence.  And besidesall this, I am afraid, Mama, he has no real taste.  Music seemsscarcely to attract him, and though he admires Elinor's drawings verymuch, it is not the admiration of a person who can understand theirworth.  It is evident, in spite of his frequent attention to her whileshe draws, that in fact he knows nothing of the matter.  He admires asa lover, not as a connoisseur.  To satisfy me, those characters must beunited.  I could not be happy with a man whose taste did not in everypoint coincide with my own.  He must enter into all my feelings; thesame books, the same music must charm us both.  Oh! mama, howspiritless, how tame was Edward's manner in reading to us last night!I felt for my sister most severely.  Yet she bore it with so muchcomposure, she seemed scarcely to notice it.  I could hardly keep myseat.  To hear those beautiful lines which have frequently almostdriven me wild, pronounced with such impenetrable calmness, suchdreadful indifference!""He would certainly have done more justice to simple and elegant prose.I thought so at the time; but you WOULD give him Cowper.""Nay, Mama, if he is not to be animated by Cowper!--but we must allowfor difference of taste.  Elinor has not my feelings, and therefore shemay overlook it, and be happy with him.  But it would have broke MYheart, had I loved him, to hear him read with so little sensibility.Mama, the more I know of the world, the more am I convinced that Ishall never see a man whom I can really love.  I require so much!  Hemust have all Edward's virtues, and his person and manners mustornament his goodness with every possible charm.""Remember, my love, that you are not seventeen.  It is yet too early inlife to despair of such a happiness.  Why should you be less fortunatethan your mother?  In one circumstance only, my Marianne, may yourdestiny be different from hers!""What a pity it is, Elinor," said Marianne, "that Edward should have notaste for drawing.""No taste for drawing!" replied Elinor, "why should you think so? Hedoes not draw himself, indeed, but he has great pleasure in seeing theperformances of other people, and I assure you he is by no meansdeficient in natural taste, though he has not had opportunities ofimproving it.  Had he ever been in the way of learning, I think hewould have drawn very well.  He distrusts his own judgment in suchmatters so much, that he is always unwilling to give his opinion on anypicture; but he has an innate propriety and simplicity of taste, whichin general direct him perfectly right."Marianne was afraid of offending, and said no more on the subject; butthe kind of approbation which Elinor described as excited in him by thedrawings of other people, was very far from that rapturous delight,which, in her opinion, could alone be called taste.  Yet, thoughsmiling within herself at the mistake, she honoured her sister for thatblind partiality to Edward which produced it."I hope, Marianne," continued Elinor, "you do not consider him asdeficient in general taste.  Indeed, I think I may say that you cannot,for your behaviour to him is perfectly cordial, and if THAT were youropinion, I am sure you could never be civil to him."Marianne hardly knew what to say.  She would not wound the feelings ofher sister on any account, and yet to say what she did not believe wasimpossible.  At length she replied:"Do not be offended, Elinor, if my praise of him is not in every thingequal to your sense of his merits.  I have not had so manyopportunities of estimating the minuter propensities of his mind, hisinclinations and tastes, as you have; but I have the highest opinion inthe world of his goodness and sense.  I think him every thing that isworthy and amiable.""I am sure," replied Elinor, with a smile, "that his dearest friendscould not be dissatisfied with such commendation as that.  I do notperceive how you could express yourself more warmly."Marianne was rejoiced to find her sister so easily pleased."Of his sense and his goodness," continued Elinor, "no one can, Ithink, be in doubt, who has seen him often enough to engage him inunreserved conversation.  The excellence of his understanding and hisprinciples can be concealed only by that shyness which too often keepshim silent.  You know enough of him to do justice to his solid worth.But of his minuter propensities, as you call them you have frompeculiar circumstances been kept more ignorant than myself.  He and Ihave been at times thrown a good deal together, while you have beenwholly engrossed on the most affectionate principle by my mother.  Ihave seen a great deal of him, have studied his sentiments and heardhis opinion on subjects of literature and taste; and, upon the whole, Iventure to pronounce that his mind is well-informed, enjoyment of booksexceedingly great, his imagination lively, his observation just andcorrect, and his taste delicate and pure.  His abilities in everyrespect improve as much upon acquaintance as his manners and person.At first sight, his address is certainly not striking; and his personcan hardly be called handsome, till the expression of his eyes, whichare uncommonly good, and the general sweetness of his countenance, isperceived.  At present, I know him so well, that I think him reallyhandsome; or at least, almost so.  What say you, Marianne?""I shall very soon think him handsome, Elinor, if I do not now.  Whenyou tell me to love him as a brother, I shall no more see imperfectionin his face, than I now do in his heart."Elinor started at this declaration, and was sorry for the warmth shehad been betrayed into, in speaking of him.  She felt that Edward stoodvery high in her opinion.  She believed the regard to be mutual; butshe required greater certainty of it to make Marianne's conviction oftheir attachment agreeable to her.  She knew that what Marianne and hermother conjectured one moment, they believed the next--that with them,to wish was to hope, and to hope was to expect.  She tried to explainthe real state of the case to her sister."I do not attempt to deny," said she, "that I think very highly ofhim--that I greatly esteem, that I like him."Marianne here burst forth with indignation--"Esteem him! Like him! Cold-hearted Elinor! Oh!  worse thancold-hearted! Ashamed of being otherwise.  Use those words again, and Iwill leave the room this moment."Elinor could not help laughing.  "Excuse me," said she; "and be assuredthat I meant no offence to you, by speaking, in so quiet a way, of myown feelings.  Believe them to be stronger than I have declared;believe them, in short, to be such as his merit, and the suspicion--thehope of his affection for me may warrant, without imprudence or folly.But farther than this you must not believe.  I am by no means assuredof his regard for me.  There are moments when the extent of it seemsdoubtful; and till his sentiments are fully known, you cannot wonder atmy wishing to avoid any encouragement of my own partiality, bybelieving or calling it more than it is.  In my heart I feellittle--scarcely any doubt of his preference.  But there are otherpoints to be considered besides his inclination.  He is very far frombeing independent.  What his mother really is we cannot know; but, fromFanny's occasional mention of her conduct and opinions, we have neverbeen disposed to think her amiable; and I am very much mistaken ifEdward is not himself aware that there would be many difficulties inhis way, if he were to wish to marry a woman who had not either a greatfortune or high rank."Marianne was astonished to find how much the imagination of her motherand herself had outstripped the truth."And you really are not engaged to him!" said she.  "Yet it certainlysoon will happen.  But two advantages will proceed from this delay.  Ishall not lose you so soon, and Edward will have greater opportunity ofimproving that natural taste for your favourite pursuit which must beso indispensably necessary to your future felicity.  Oh! if he shouldbe so far stimulated by your genius as to learn to draw himself, howdelightful it would be!"Elinor had given her real opinion to her sister.  She could notconsider her partiality for Edward in so prosperous a state as Mariannehad believed it.  There was, at times, a want of spirits about himwhich, if it did not denote indifference, spoke of something almost asunpromising.  A doubt of her regard, supposing him to feel it, need notgive him more than inquietude.  It would not be likely to produce thatdejection of mind which frequently attended him.  A more reasonablecause might be found in the dependent situation which forbade theindulgence of his affection.  She knew that his mother neither behavedto him so as to make his home comfortable at present, nor to give himany assurance that he might form a home for himself, without strictlyattending to her views for his aggrandizement.  With such a knowledgeas this, it was impossible for Elinor to feel easy on the subject.  Shewas far from depending on that result of his preference of her, whichher mother and sister still considered as certain.  Nay, the longerthey were together the more doubtful seemed the nature of his regard;and sometimes, for a few painful minutes, she believed it to be no morethan friendship.But, whatever might really be its limits, it was enough, when perceivedby his sister, to make her uneasy, and at the same time, (which wasstill more common,) to make her uncivil.  She took the firstopportunity of affronting her mother-in-law on the occasion, talking toher so expressively of her brother's great expectations, of Mrs.Ferrars's resolution that both her sons should marry well, and of thedanger attending any young woman who attempted to DRAW HIM IN; thatMrs. Dashwood could neither pretend to be unconscious, nor endeavor tobe calm.  She gave her an answer which marked her contempt, andinstantly left the room, resolving that, whatever might be theinconvenience or expense of so sudden a removal, her beloved Elinorshould not be exposed another week to such insinuations.In this state of her spirits, a letter was delivered to her from thepost, which contained a proposal particularly well timed.  It was theoffer of a small house, on very easy terms, belonging to a relation ofher own, a gentleman of consequence and property in Devonshire.  Theletter was from this gentleman himself, and written in the true spiritof friendly accommodation.  He understood that she was in need of adwelling; and though the house he now offered her was merely a cottage,he assured her that everything should be done to it which she mightthink necessary, if the situation pleased her.  He earnestly pressedher, after giving the particulars of the house and garden, to come withher daughters to Barton Park, the place of his own residence, fromwhence she might judge, herself, whether Barton Cottage, for the houseswere in the same parish, could, by any alteration, be made comfortableto her.  He seemed really anxious to accommodate them and the whole ofhis letter was written in so friendly a style as could not fail ofgiving pleasure to his cousin; more especially at a moment when she wassuffering under the cold and unfeeling behaviour of her nearerconnections.  She needed no time for deliberation or inquiry.  Herresolution was formed as she read.  The situation of Barton, in acounty so far distant from Sussex as Devonshire, which, but a few hoursbefore, would have been a sufficient objection to outweigh everypossible advantage belonging to the place, was now its firstrecommendation.  To quit the neighbourhood of Norland was no longer anevil; it was an object of desire; it was a blessing, in comparison ofthe misery of continuing her daughter-in-law's guest; and to remove forever from that beloved place would be less painful than to inhabit orvisit it while such a woman was its mistress.  She instantly wrote SirJohn Middleton her acknowledgment of his kindness, and her acceptanceof his proposal; and then hastened to shew both letters to herdaughters, that she might be secure of their approbation before heranswer were sent.Elinor had always thought it would be more prudent for them to settleat some distance from Norland, than immediately amongst their presentacquaintance.  On THAT head, therefore, it was not for her to opposeher mother's intention of removing into Devonshire.  The house, too, asdescribed by Sir John, was on so simple a scale, and the rent souncommonly moderate, as to leave her no right of objection on eitherpoint; and, therefore, though it was not a plan which brought any charmto her fancy, though it was a removal from the vicinity of Norlandbeyond her wishes, she made no attempt to dissuade her mother fromsending a letter of acquiescence.No sooner was her answer dispatched, than Mrs. Dashwood indulged herselfin the pleasure of announcing to her son-in-law and his wife that shewas provided with a house, and should incommode them no longer than tillevery thing were ready for her inhabiting it. They heard her withsurprise. Mrs. John Dashwood said nothing; but her husband civilly hopedthat she would not be settled far from Norland. She had greatsatisfaction in replying that she was going into Devonshire.--Edwardturned hastily towards her, on hearing this, and, in a voice of surpriseand concern, which required no explanation to her, repeated,"Devonshire! Are you, indeed, going there? So far from hence! And towhat part of it?" She explained the situation. It was within four milesnorthward of Exeter."It is but a cottage," she continued, "but I hope to see many of myfriends in it.  A room or two can easily be added; and if my friendsfind no difficulty in travelling so far to see me, I am sure I willfind none in accommodating them."She concluded with a very kind invitation to Mr. and Mrs. John Dashwoodto visit her at Barton; and to Edward she gave one with still greateraffection.  Though her late conversation with her daughter-in-law hadmade her resolve on remaining at Norland no longer than wasunavoidable, it had not produced the smallest effect on her in thatpoint to which it principally tended.  To separate Edward and Elinorwas as far from being her object as ever; and she wished to show Mrs.John Dashwood, by this pointed invitation to her brother, how totallyshe disregarded her disapprobation of the match.Mr. John Dashwood told his mother again and again how exceedingly sorryhe was that she had taken a house at such a distance from Norland as toprevent his being of any service to her in removing her furniture.  Hereally felt conscientiously vexed on the occasion; for the veryexertion to which he had limited the performance of his promise to hisfather was by this arrangement rendered impracticable.-- The furniturewas all sent around by water.  It chiefly consisted of household linen,plate, china, and books, with a handsome pianoforte of Marianne's.Mrs. John Dashwood saw the packages depart with a sigh: she could nothelp feeling it hard that as Mrs. Dashwood's income would be sotrifling in comparison with their own, she should have any handsomearticle of furniture.Mrs. Dashwood took the house for a twelvemonth; it was ready furnished,and she might have immediate possession.  No difficulty arose on eitherside in the agreement; and she waited only for the disposal of hereffects at Norland, and to determine her future household, before sheset off for the west; and this, as she was exceedingly rapid in theperformance of everything that interested her, was soon done.--Thehorses which were left her by her husband had been sold soon after hisdeath, and an opportunity now offering of disposing of her carriage,she agreed to sell that likewise at the earnest advice of her eldestdaughter.  For the comfort of her children, had she consulted only herown wishes, she would have kept it; but the discretion of Elinorprevailed.  HER wisdom too limited the number of their servants tothree; two maids and a man, with whom they were speedily provided fromamongst those who had formed their establishment at Norland.The man and one of the maids were sent off immediately into Devonshire,to prepare the house for their mistress's arrival; for as LadyMiddleton was entirely unknown to Mrs. Dashwood, she preferred goingdirectly to the cottage to being a visitor at Barton Park; and sherelied so undoubtingly on Sir John's description of the house, as tofeel no curiosity to examine it herself till she entered it as her own.Her eagerness to be gone from Norland was preserved from diminution bythe evident satisfaction of her daughter-in-law in the prospect of herremoval; a satisfaction which was but feebly attempted to be concealedunder a cold invitation to her to defer her departure.  Now was thetime when her son-in-law's promise to his father might with particularpropriety be fulfilled.  Since he had neglected to do it on firstcoming to the estate, their quitting his house might be looked on asthe most suitable period for its accomplishment.  But Mrs. Dashwoodbegan shortly to give over every hope of the kind, and to be convinced,from the general drift of his discourse, that his assistance extendedno farther than their maintenance for six months at Norland.  He sofrequently talked of the increasing expenses of housekeeping, and ofthe perpetual demands upon his purse, which a man of any consequence inthe world was beyond calculation exposed to, that he seemed rather tostand in need of more money himself than to have any design of givingmoney away.In a very few weeks from the day which brought Sir John Middleton'sfirst letter to Norland, every thing was so far settled in their futureabode as to enable Mrs. Dashwood and her daughters to begin theirjourney.Many were the tears shed by them in their last adieus to a place somuch beloved.  "Dear, dear Norland!" said Marianne, as she wanderedalone before the house, on the last evening of their being there; "whenshall I cease to regret you!--when learn to feel a home elsewhere!--Oh!happy house, could you know what I suffer in now viewing you from thisspot, from whence perhaps I may view you no more!--And you, yewell-known trees!--but you will continue the same.--No leaf will decaybecause we are removed, nor any branch become motionless although wecan observe you no longer!--No; you will continue the same; unconsciousof the pleasure or the regret you occasion, and insensible of anychange in those who walk under your shade!--But who will remain toenjoy you?"The first part of their journey was performed in too melancholy adisposition to be otherwise than tedious and unpleasant.  But as theydrew towards the end of it, their interest in the appearance of acountry which they were to inhabit overcame their dejection, and a viewof Barton Valley as they entered it gave them cheerfulness.  It was apleasant fertile spot, well wooded, and rich in pasture.  After windingalong it for more than a mile, they reached their own house.  A smallgreen court was the whole of its demesne in front; and a neat wicketgate admitted them into it.As a house, Barton Cottage, though small, was comfortable and compact;but as a cottage it was defective, for the building was regular, theroof was tiled, the window shutters were not painted green, nor werethe walls covered with honeysuckles.  A narrow passage led directlythrough the house into the garden behind.  On each side of the entrancewas a sitting room, about sixteen feet square; and beyond them were theoffices and the stairs.  Four bed-rooms and two garrets formed the restof the house.  It had not been built many years and was in good repair.In comparison of Norland, it was poor and small indeed!--but the tearswhich recollection called forth as they entered the house were soondried away.  They were cheered by the joy of the servants on theirarrival, and each for the sake of the others resolved to appear happy.It was very early in September; the season was fine, and from firstseeing the place under the advantage of good weather, they received animpression in its favour which was of material service in recommendingit to their lasting approbation.The situation of the house was good.  High hills rose immediatelybehind, and at no great distance on each side; some of which were opendowns, the others cultivated and woody.  The village of Barton waschiefly on one of these hills, and formed a pleasant view from thecottage windows.  The prospect in front was more extensive; itcommanded the whole of the valley, and reached into the country beyond.The hills which surrounded the cottage terminated the valley in thatdirection; under another name, and in another course, it branched outagain between two of the steepest of them.With the size and furniture of the house Mrs. Dashwood was upon thewhole well satisfied; for though her former style of life rendered manyadditions to the latter indispensable, yet to add and improve was adelight to her; and she had at this time ready money enough to supplyall that was wanted of greater elegance to the apartments.  "As for thehouse itself, to be sure," said she, "it is too small for our family,but we will make ourselves tolerably comfortable for the present, as itis too late in the year for improvements.  Perhaps in the spring, if Ihave plenty of money, as I dare say I shall, we may think aboutbuilding.  These parlors are both too small for such parties of ourfriends as I hope to see often collected here; and I have some thoughtsof throwing the passage into one of them with perhaps a part of theother, and so leave the remainder of that other for an entrance; this,with a new drawing room which may be easily added, and a bed-chamberand garret above, will make it a very snug little cottage.  I couldwish the stairs were handsome.  But one must not expect every thing;though I suppose it would be no difficult matter to widen them.  Ishall see how much I am before-hand with the world in the spring, andwe will plan our improvements accordingly."In the mean time, till all these alterations could be made from thesavings of an income of five hundred a-year by a woman who never savedin her life, they were wise enough to be contented with the house as itwas; and each of them was busy in arranging their particular concerns,and endeavoring, by placing around them books and other possessions, toform themselves a home.  Marianne's pianoforte was unpacked andproperly disposed of; and Elinor's drawings were affixed to the wallsof their sitting room.In such employments as these they were interrupted soon after breakfastthe next day by the entrance of their landlord, who called to welcomethem to Barton, and to offer them every accommodation from his ownhouse and garden in which theirs might at present be deficient.  SirJohn Middleton was a good looking man about forty.  He had formerlyvisited at Stanhill, but it was too long for his young cousins toremember him.  His countenance was thoroughly good-humoured; and hismanners were as friendly as the style of his letter.  Their arrivalseemed to afford him real satisfaction, and their comfort to be anobject of real solicitude to him.  He said much of his earnest desireof their living in the most sociable terms with his family, and pressedthem so cordially to dine at Barton Park every day till they werebetter settled at home, that, though his entreaties were carried to apoint of perseverance beyond civility, they could not give offence.His kindness was not confined to words; for within an hour after heleft them, a large basket full of garden stuff and fruit arrived fromthe park, which was followed before the end of the day by a present ofgame.  He insisted, moreover, on conveying all their letters to andfrom the post for them, and would not be denied the satisfaction ofsending them his newspaper every day.Lady Middleton had sent a very civil message by him, denoting herintention of waiting on Mrs. Dashwood as soon as she could be assuredthat her visit would be no inconvenience; and as this message wasanswered by an invitation equally polite, her ladyship was introducedto them the next day.They were, of course, very anxious to see a person on whom so much oftheir comfort at Barton must depend; and the elegance of her appearancewas favourable to their wishes.  Lady Middleton was not more than sixor seven and twenty; her face was handsome, her figure tall andstriking, and her address graceful.  Her manners had all the elegancewhich her husband's wanted.  But they would have been improved by someshare of his frankness and warmth; and her visit was long enough todetract something from their first admiration, by shewing that, thoughperfectly well-bred, she was reserved, cold, and had nothing to say forherself beyond the most common-place inquiry or remark.Conversation however was not wanted, for Sir John was very chatty, andLady Middleton had taken the wise precaution of bringing with her theireldest child, a fine little boy about six years old, by which meansthere was one subject always to be recurred to by the ladies in case ofextremity, for they had to enquire his name and age, admire his beauty,and ask him questions which his mother answered for him, while he hungabout her and held down his head, to the great surprise of herladyship, who wondered at his being so shy before company, as he couldmake noise enough at home.  On every formal visit a child ought to beof the party, by way of provision for discourse.  In the present caseit took up ten minutes to determine whether the boy were most like hisfather or mother, and in what particular he resembled either, for ofcourse every body differed, and every body was astonished at theopinion of the others.An opportunity was soon to be given to the Dashwoods of debating on therest of the children, as Sir John would not leave the house withoutsecuring their promise of dining at the park the next day.Barton Park was about half a mile from the cottage.  The ladies hadpassed near it in their way along the valley, but it was screened fromtheir view at home by the projection of a hill.  The house was largeand handsome; and the Middletons lived in a style of equal hospitalityand elegance.  The former was for Sir John's gratification, the latterfor that of his lady.  They were scarcely ever without some friendsstaying with them in the house, and they kept more company of everykind than any other family in the neighbourhood.  It was necessary tothe happiness of both; for however dissimilar in temper and outwardbehaviour, they strongly resembled each other in that total want oftalent and taste which confined their employments, unconnected withsuch as society produced, within a very narrow compass.  Sir John was asportsman, Lady Middleton a mother.  He hunted and shot, and shehumoured her children; and these were their only resources.  LadyMiddleton had the advantage of being able to spoil her children all theyear round, while Sir John's independent employments were in existenceonly half the time.  Continual engagements at home and abroad, however,supplied all the deficiencies of nature and education; supported thegood spirits of Sir John, and gave exercise to the good breeding of hiswife.Lady Middleton piqued herself upon the elegance of her table, and ofall her domestic arrangements; and from this kind of vanity was hergreatest enjoyment in any of their parties.  But Sir John'ssatisfaction in society was much more real; he delighted in collectingabout him more young people than his house would hold, and the noisierthey were the better was he pleased.  He was a blessing to all thejuvenile part of the neighbourhood, for in summer he was for everforming parties to eat cold ham and chicken out of doors, and in winterhis private balls were numerous enough for any young lady who was notsuffering under the unsatiable appetite of fifteen.The arrival of a new family in the country was always a matter of joyto him, and in every point of view he was charmed with the inhabitantshe had now procured for his cottage at Barton.  The Miss Dashwoods wereyoung, pretty, and unaffected.  It was enough to secure his goodopinion; for to be unaffected was all that a pretty girl could want tomake her mind as captivating as her person.  The friendliness of hisdisposition made him happy in accommodating those, whose situationmight be considered, in comparison with the past, as unfortunate.  Inshowing kindness to his cousins therefore he had the real satisfactionof a good heart; and in settling a family of females only in hiscottage, he had all the satisfaction of a sportsman; for a sportsman,though he esteems only those of his sex who are sportsmen likewise, isnot often desirous of encouraging their taste by admitting them to aresidence within his own manor.Mrs. Dashwood and her daughters were met at the door of the house bySir John, who welcomed them to Barton Park with unaffected sincerity;and as he attended them to the drawing room repeated to the youngladies the concern which the same subject had drawn from him the daybefore, at being unable to get any smart young men to meet them.  Theywould see, he said, only one gentleman there besides himself; aparticular friend who was staying at the park, but who was neither veryyoung nor very gay.  He hoped they would all excuse the smallness ofthe party, and could assure them it should never happen so again.  Hehad been to several families that morning in hopes of procuring someaddition to their number, but it was moonlight and every body was fullof engagements.  Luckily Lady Middleton's mother had arrived at Bartonwithin the last hour, and as she was a very cheerful agreeable woman,he hoped the young ladies would not find it so very dull as they mightimagine.  The young ladies, as well as their mother, were perfectlysatisfied with having two entire strangers of the party, and wished forno more.Mrs. Jennings, Lady Middleton's mother, was a good-humoured, merry,fat, elderly woman, who talked a great deal, seemed very happy, andrather vulgar.  She was full of jokes and laughter, and before dinnerwas over had said many witty things on the subject of lovers andhusbands; hoped they had not left their hearts behind them in Sussex,and pretended to see them blush whether they did or not.  Marianne wasvexed at it for her sister's sake, and turned her eyes towards Elinorto see how she bore these attacks, with an earnestness which gaveElinor far more pain than could arise from such common-place railleryas Mrs. Jennings's.Colonel Brandon, the friend of Sir John, seemed no more adapted byresemblance of manner to be his friend, than Lady Middleton was to behis wife, or Mrs. Jennings to be Lady Middleton's mother.  He wassilent and grave.  His appearance however was not unpleasing, in spiteof his being in the opinion of Marianne and Margaret an absolute oldbachelor, for he was on the wrong side of five and thirty; but thoughhis face was not handsome, his countenance was sensible, and hisaddress was particularly gentlemanlike.There was nothing in any of the party which could recommend them ascompanions to the Dashwoods; but the cold insipidity of Lady Middletonwas so particularly repulsive, that in comparison of it the gravity ofColonel Brandon, and even the boisterous mirth of Sir John and hismother-in-law was interesting.  Lady Middleton seemed to be roused toenjoyment only by the entrance of her four noisy children after dinner,who pulled her about, tore her clothes, and put an end to every kind ofdiscourse except what related to themselves.In the evening, as Marianne was discovered to be musical, she wasinvited to play.  The instrument was unlocked, every body prepared tobe charmed, and Marianne, who sang very well, at their request wentthrough the chief of the songs which Lady Middleton had brought intothe family on her marriage, and which perhaps had lain ever since inthe same position on the pianoforte, for her ladyship had celebratedthat event by giving up music, although by her mother's account, shehad played extremely well, and by her own was very fond of it.Marianne's performance was highly applauded.  Sir John was loud in hisadmiration at the end of every song, and as loud in his conversationwith the others while every song lasted.  Lady Middleton frequentlycalled him to order, wondered how any one's attention could be divertedfrom music for a moment, and asked Marianne to sing a particular songwhich Marianne had just finished.  Colonel Brandon alone, of all theparty, heard her without being in raptures.  He paid her only thecompliment of attention; and she felt a respect for him on theoccasion, which the others had reasonably forfeited by their shamelesswant of taste.  His pleasure in music, though it amounted not to thatecstatic delight which alone could sympathize with her own, wasestimable when contrasted against the horrible insensibility of theothers; and she was reasonable enough to allow that a man of five andthirty might well have outlived all acuteness of feeling and everyexquisite power of enjoyment.  She was perfectly disposed to make everyallowance for the colonel's advanced state of life which humanityrequired.Mrs. Jennings was a widow with an ample jointure.  She had only twodaughters, both of whom she had lived to see respectably married, andshe had now therefore nothing to do but to marry all the rest of theworld.  In the promotion of this object she was zealously active, asfar as her ability reached; and missed no opportunity of projectingweddings among all the young people of her acquaintance.  She wasremarkably quick in the discovery of attachments, and had enjoyed theadvantage of raising the blushes and the vanity of many a young lady byinsinuations of her power over such a young man; and this kind ofdiscernment enabled her soon after her arrival at Barton decisively topronounce that Colonel Brandon was very much in love with MarianneDashwood.  She rather suspected it to be so, on the very first eveningof their being together, from his listening so attentively while shesang to them; and when the visit was returned by the Middletons' diningat the cottage, the fact was ascertained by his listening to her again.It must be so.  She was perfectly convinced of it.  It would be anexcellent match, for HE was rich, and SHE was handsome.  Mrs. Jenningshad been anxious to see Colonel Brandon well married, ever since herconnection with Sir John first brought him to her knowledge; and shewas always anxious to get a good husband for every pretty girl.The immediate advantage to herself was by no means inconsiderable, forit supplied her with endless jokes against them both.  At the park shelaughed at the colonel, and in the cottage at Marianne.  To the formerher raillery was probably, as far as it regarded only himself,perfectly indifferent; but to the latter it was at firstincomprehensible; and when its object was understood, she hardly knewwhether most to laugh at its absurdity, or censure its impertinence,for she considered it as an unfeeling reflection on the colonel'sadvanced years, and on his forlorn condition as an old bachelor.Mrs. Dashwood, who could not think a man five years younger thanherself, so exceedingly ancient as he appeared to the youthful fancy ofher daughter, ventured to clear Mrs. Jennings from the probability ofwishing to throw ridicule on his age."But at least, Mama, you cannot deny the absurdity of the accusation,though you may not think it intentionally ill-natured.  Colonel Brandonis certainly younger than Mrs. Jennings, but he is old enough to be MYfather; and if he were ever animated enough to be in love, must havelong outlived every sensation of the kind.  It is too ridiculous!  Whenis a man to be safe from such wit, if age and infirmity will notprotect him?""Infirmity!" said Elinor, "do you call Colonel Brandon infirm?  I caneasily suppose that his age may appear much greater to you than to mymother; but you can hardly deceive yourself as to his having the use ofhis limbs!""Did not you hear him complain of the rheumatism?  and is not that thecommonest infirmity of declining life?""My dearest child," said her mother, laughing, "at this rate you mustbe in continual terror of MY decay; and it must seem to you a miraclethat my life has been extended to the advanced age of forty.""Mama, you are not doing me justice.  I know very well that ColonelBrandon is not old enough to make his friends yet apprehensive oflosing him in the course of nature.  He may live twenty years longer.But thirty-five has nothing to do with matrimony.""Perhaps," said Elinor, "thirty-five and seventeen had better not haveany thing to do with matrimony together.  But if there should by anychance happen to be a woman who is single at seven and twenty, I shouldnot think Colonel Brandon's being thirty-five any objection to hismarrying HER.""A woman of seven and twenty," said Marianne, after pausing a moment,"can never hope to feel or inspire affection again, and if her home beuncomfortable, or her fortune small, I can suppose that she might bringherself to submit to the offices of a nurse, for the sake of theprovision and security of a wife.  In his marrying such a womantherefore there would be nothing unsuitable.  It would be a compact ofconvenience, and the world would be satisfied.  In my eyes it would beno marriage at all, but that would be nothing.  To me it would seemonly a commercial exchange, in which each wished to be benefited at theexpense of the other.""It would be impossible, I know," replied Elinor, "to convince you thata woman of seven and twenty could feel for a man of thirty-fiveanything near enough to love, to make him a desirable companion to her.But I must object to your dooming Colonel Brandon and his wife to theconstant confinement of a sick chamber, merely because he chanced tocomplain yesterday (a very cold damp day) of a slight rheumatic feel inone of his shoulders.""But he talked of flannel waistcoats," said Marianne; "and with me aflannel waistcoat is invariably connected with aches, cramps,rheumatisms, and every species of ailment that can afflict the old andthe feeble.""Had he been only in a violent fever, you would not have despised himhalf so much.  Confess, Marianne, is not there something interesting toyou in the flushed cheek, hollow eye, and quick pulse of a fever?"Soon after this, upon Elinor's leaving the room, "Mama," saidMarianne, "I have an alarm on the subject of illness which I cannotconceal from you.  I am sure Edward Ferrars is not well.  We have nowbeen here almost a fortnight, and yet he does not come.  Nothing butreal indisposition could occasion this extraordinary delay.  What elsecan detain him at Norland?""Had you any idea of his coming so soon?" said Mrs. Dashwood.  "I hadnone.  On the contrary, if I have felt any anxiety at all on thesubject, it has been in recollecting that he sometimes showed a want ofpleasure and readiness in accepting my invitation, when I talked of hiscoming to Barton.  Does Elinor expect him already?""I have never mentioned it to her, but of course she must.""I rather think you are mistaken, for when I was talking to heryesterday of getting a new grate for the spare bedchamber, she observedthat there was no immediate hurry for it, as it was not likely that theroom would be wanted for some time.""How strange this is! what can be the meaning of it!  But the whole oftheir behaviour to each other has been unaccountable! How cold, howcomposed were their last adieus! How languid their conversation thelast evening of their being together! In Edward's farewell there was nodistinction between Elinor and me: it was the good wishes of anaffectionate brother to both.  Twice did I leave them purposelytogether in the course of the last morning, and each time did he mostunaccountably follow me out of the room.  And Elinor, in quittingNorland and Edward, cried not as I did.  Even now her self-command isinvariable.  When is she dejected or melancholy? When does she try toavoid society, or appear restless and dissatisfied in it?"The Dashwoods were now settled at Barton with tolerable comfort tothemselves.  The house and the garden, with all the objects surroundingthem, were now become familiar, and the ordinary pursuits which hadgiven to Norland half its charms were engaged in again with far greaterenjoyment than Norland had been able to afford, since the loss of theirfather.  Sir John Middleton, who called on them every day for the firstfortnight, and who was not in the habit of seeing much occupation athome, could not conceal his amazement on finding them always employed.Their visitors, except those from Barton Park, were not many; for, inspite of Sir John's urgent entreaties that they would mix more in theneighbourhood, and repeated assurances of his carriage being always attheir service, the independence of Mrs. Dashwood's spirit overcame thewish of society for her children; and she was resolute in declining tovisit any family beyond the distance of a walk.  There were but few whocould be so classed; and it was not all of them that were attainable.About a mile and a half from the cottage, along the narrow windingvalley of Allenham, which issued from that of Barton, as formerlydescribed, the girls had, in one of their earliest walks, discovered anancient respectable looking mansion which, by reminding them a littleof Norland, interested their imagination and made them wish to bebetter acquainted with it.  But they learnt, on enquiry, that itspossessor, an elderly lady of very good character, was unfortunatelytoo infirm to mix with the world, and never stirred from home.The whole country about them abounded in beautiful walks.  The highdowns which invited them from almost every window of the cottage toseek the exquisite enjoyment of air on their summits, were a happyalternative when the dirt of the valleys beneath shut up their superiorbeauties; and towards one of these hills did Marianne and Margaret onememorable morning direct their steps, attracted by the partial sunshineof a showery sky, and unable longer to bear the confinement which thesettled rain of the two preceding days had occasioned.  The weather wasnot tempting enough to draw the two others from their pencil and theirbook, in spite of Marianne's declaration that the day would belastingly fair, and that every threatening cloud would be drawn offfrom their hills; and the two girls set off together.They gaily ascended the downs, rejoicing in their own penetration atevery glimpse of blue sky; and when they caught in their faces theanimating gales of a high south-westerly wind, they pitied the fearswhich had prevented their mother and Elinor from sharing suchdelightful sensations."Is there a felicity in the world," said Marianne, "superior tothis?--Margaret, we will walk here at least two hours."Margaret agreed, and they pursued their way against the wind, resistingit with laughing delight for about twenty minutes longer, when suddenlythe clouds united over their heads, and a driving rain set full intheir face.-- Chagrined and surprised, they were obliged, thoughunwillingly, to turn back, for no shelter was nearer than their ownhouse.  One consolation however remained for them, to which theexigence of the moment gave more than usual propriety; it was that ofrunning with all possible speed down the steep side of the hill whichled immediately to their garden gate.They set off.  Marianne had at first the advantage, but a false stepbrought her suddenly to the ground; and Margaret, unable to stopherself to assist her, was involuntarily hurried along, and reached thebottom in safety.A gentleman carrying a gun, with two pointers playing round him, waspassing up the hill and within a few yards of Marianne, when heraccident happened.  He put down his gun and ran to her assistance.  Shehad raised herself from the ground, but her foot had been twisted inher fall, and she was scarcely able to stand.  The gentleman offeredhis services; and perceiving that her modesty declined what hersituation rendered necessary, took her up in his arms without fartherdelay, and carried her down the hill.  Then passing through the garden,the gate of which had been left open by Margaret, he bore her directlyinto the house, whither Margaret was just arrived, and quitted not hishold till he had seated her in a chair in the parlour.Elinor and her mother rose up in amazement at their entrance, and whilethe eyes of both were fixed on him with an evident wonder and a secretadmiration which equally sprung from his appearance, he apologized forhis intrusion by relating its cause, in a manner so frank and sograceful that his person, which was uncommonly handsome, receivedadditional charms from his voice and expression.  Had he been even old,ugly, and vulgar, the gratitude and kindness of Mrs. Dashwood wouldhave been secured by any act of attention to her child; but theinfluence of youth, beauty, and elegance, gave an interest to theaction which came home to her feelings.She thanked him again and again; and, with a sweetness of address whichalways attended her, invited him to be seated.  But this he declined,as he was dirty and wet.  Mrs. Dashwood then begged to know to whom shewas obliged.  His name, he replied, was Willoughby, and his presenthome was at Allenham, from whence he hoped she would allow him thehonour of calling tomorrow to enquire after Miss Dashwood.  The honourwas readily granted, and he then departed, to make himself still moreinteresting, in the midst of a heavy rain.His manly beauty and more than common gracefulness were instantly thetheme of general admiration, and the laugh which his gallantry raisedagainst Marianne received particular spirit from his exteriorattractions.-- Marianne herself had seen less of his Mama therest, for the confusion which crimsoned over her face, on his liftingher up, had robbed her of the power of regarding him after theirentering the house.  But she had seen enough of him to join in all theadmiration of the others, and with an energy which always adorned herpraise.  His person and air were equal to what her fancy had ever drawnfor the hero of a favourite story; and in his carrying her into thehouse with so little previous formality, there was a rapidity ofthought which particularly recommended the action to her.  Everycircumstance belonging to him was interesting.  His name was good, hisresidence was in their favourite village, and she soon found out thatof all manly dresses a shooting-jacket was the most becoming.  Herimagination was busy, her reflections were pleasant, and the pain of asprained ankle was disregarded.Sir John called on them as soon as the next interval of fair weatherthat morning allowed him to get out of doors; and Marianne's accidentbeing related to him, he was eagerly asked whether he knew anygentleman of the name of Willoughby at Allenham."Willoughby!" cried Sir John; "what, is HE in the country? That is goodnews however; I will ride over tomorrow, and ask him to dinner onThursday.""You know him then," said Mrs. Dashwood."Know him! to be sure I do.  Why, he is down here every year.""And what sort of a young man is he?""As good a kind of fellow as ever lived, I assure you.  A very decentshot, and there is not a bolder rider in England.""And is that all you can say for him?" cried Marianne, indignantly."But what are his manners on more intimate acquaintance? What hispursuits, his talents, and genius?"Sir John was rather puzzled."Upon my soul," said he, "I do not know much about him as to all THAT.But he is a pleasant, good humoured fellow, and has got the nicestlittle black bitch of a pointer I ever saw.  Was she out with himtoday?"But Marianne could no more satisfy him as to the colour of Mr.Willoughby's pointer, than he could describe to her the shades of hismind."But who is he?" said Elinor.  "Where does he come from?  Has he ahouse at Allenham?"On this point Sir John could give more certain intelligence; and hetold them that Mr. Willoughby had no property of his own in thecountry; that he resided there only while he was visiting the old ladyat Allenham Court, to whom he was related, and whose possessions he wasto inherit; adding, "Yes, yes, he is very well worth catching I cantell you, Miss Dashwood; he has a pretty little estate of his own inSomersetshire besides; and if I were you, I would not give him up to myyounger sister, in spite of all this tumbling down hills.  MissMarianne must not expect to have all the men to herself.  Brandon willbe jealous, if she does not take care.""I do not believe," said Mrs. Dashwood, with a good humoured smile,"that Mr. Willoughby will be incommoded by the attempts of either of MYdaughters towards what you call CATCHING him.  It is not an employmentto which they have been brought up.  Men are very safe with us, letthem be ever so rich.  I am glad to find, however, from what you say,that he is a respectable young man, and one whose acquaintance will notbe ineligible.""He is as good a sort of fellow, I believe, as ever lived," repeatedSir John.  "I remember last Christmas at a little hop at the park, hedanced from eight o'clock till four, without once sitting down.""Did he indeed?" cried Marianne with sparkling eyes, "and withelegance, with spirit?""Yes; and he was up again at eight to ride to covert.""That is what I like; that is what a young man ought to be.  Whateverbe his pursuits, his eagerness in them should know no moderation, andleave him no sense of fatigue.""Aye, aye, I see how it will be," said Sir John, "I see how it will be.You will be setting your cap at him now, and never think of poorBrandon.""That is an expression, Sir John," said Marianne, warmly, "which Iparticularly dislike.  I abhor every common-place phrase by which witis intended; and 'setting one's cap at a man,' or 'making a conquest,'are the most odious of all.  Their tendency is gross and illiberal; andif their construction could ever be deemed clever, time has long agodestroyed all its ingenuity."Sir John did not much understand this reproof; but he laughed asheartily as if he did, and then replied,"Ay, you will make conquests enough, I dare say, one way or other.Poor Brandon! he is quite smitten already, and he is very well worthsetting your cap at, I can tell you, in spite of all this tumblingabout and spraining of ankles."Marianne's preserver, as Margaret, with more elegance than precision,styled Willoughby, called at the cottage early the next morning to makehis personal enquiries.  He was received by Mrs. Dashwood with morethan politeness; with a kindness which Sir John's account of him andher own gratitude prompted; and every thing that passed during thevisit tended to assure him of the sense, elegance, mutual affection,and domestic comfort of the family to whom accident had now introducedhim.  Of their personal charms he had not required a second interviewto be convinced.Miss Dashwood had a delicate complexion, regular features, and aremarkably pretty figure.  Marianne was still handsomer.  Her form,though not so correct as her sister's, in having the advantage ofheight, was more striking; and her face was so lovely, that when in thecommon cant of praise, she was called a beautiful girl, truth was lessviolently outraged than usually happens.  Her skin was very brown, but,from its transparency, her complexion was uncommonly brilliant; herfeatures were all good; her smile was sweet and attractive; and in hereyes, which were very dark, there was a life, a spirit, an eagerness,which could hardily be seen without delight.  From Willoughby theirexpression was at first held back, by the embarrassment which theremembrance of his assistance created.  But when this passed away, whenher spirits became collected, when she saw that to the perfectgood-breeding of the gentleman, he united frankness and vivacity, andabove all, when she heard him declare, that of music and dancing he waspassionately fond, she gave him such a look of approbation as securedthe largest share of his discourse to herself for the rest of his stay.It was only necessary to mention any favourite amusement to engage herto talk.  She could not be silent when such points were introduced, andshe had neither shyness nor reserve in their discussion.  They speedilydiscovered that their enjoyment of dancing and music was mutual, andthat it arose from a general conformity of judgment in all that relatedto either.  Encouraged by this to a further examination of hisopinions, she proceeded to question him on the subject of books; herfavourite authors were brought forward and dwelt upon with so rapturousa delight, that any young man of five and twenty must have beeninsensible indeed, not to become an immediate convert to the excellenceof such works, however disregarded before.  Their taste was strikinglyalike.  The same books, the same passages were idolized by each--or ifany difference appeared, any objection arose, it lasted no longer thantill the force of her arguments and the brightness of her eyes could bedisplayed.  He acquiesced in all her decisions, caught all herenthusiasm; and long before his visit concluded, they conversed withthe familiarity of a long-established acquaintance."Well, Marianne," said Elinor, as soon as he had left them, "for ONEmorning I think you have done pretty well.  You have alreadyascertained Mr. Willoughby's opinion in almost every matter ofimportance.  You know what he thinks of Cowper and Scott; you arecertain of his estimating their beauties as he ought, and you havereceived every assurance of his admiring Pope no more than is proper.But how is your acquaintance to be long supported, under suchextraordinary despatch of every subject for discourse?  You will soonhave exhausted each favourite topic.  Another meeting will suffice toexplain his sentiments on picturesque beauty, and second marriages, andthen you can have nothing farther to ask."--"Elinor," cried Marianne, "is this fair? is this just? are my ideas soscanty?  But I see what you mean.  I have been too much at my ease, toohappy, too frank.  I have erred against every common-place notion ofdecorum; I have been open and sincere where I ought to have beenreserved, spiritless, dull, and deceitful--had I talked only of theweather and the roads, and had I spoken only once in ten minutes, thisreproach would have been spared.""My love," said her mother, "you must not be offended with Elinor--shewas only in jest.  I should scold her myself, if she were capable ofwishing to check the delight of your conversation with our newfriend."-- Marianne was softened in a moment.Willoughby, on his side, gave every proof of his pleasure in theiracquaintance, which an evident wish of improving it could offer.  Hecame to them every day.  To enquire after Marianne was at first hisexcuse; but the encouragement of his reception, to which every day gavegreater kindness, made such an excuse unnecessary before it had ceasedto be possible, by Marianne's perfect recovery.  She was confined forsome days to the house; but never had any confinement been lessirksome.  Willoughby was a young man of good abilities, quickimagination, lively spirits, and open, affectionate manners.  He wasexactly formed to engage Marianne's heart, for with all this, he joinednot only a captivating person, but a natural ardour of mind which wasnow roused and increased by the example of her own, and whichrecommended him to her affection beyond every thing else.His society became gradually her most exquisite enjoyment.  They read,they talked, they sang together; his musical talents were considerable;and he read with all the sensibility and spirit which Edward hadunfortunately wanted.In Mrs. Dashwood's estimation he was as faultless as in Marianne's; andElinor saw nothing to censure in him but a propensity, in which hestrongly resembled and peculiarly delighted her sister, of saying toomuch what he thought on every occasion, without attention to persons orcircumstances.  In hastily forming and giving his opinion of otherpeople, in sacrificing general politeness to the enjoyment of undividedattention where his heart was engaged, and in slighting too easily theforms of worldly propriety, he displayed a want of caution which Elinorcould not approve, in spite of all that he and Marianne could say inits support.Marianne began now to perceive that the desperation which had seizedher at sixteen and a half, of ever seeing a man who could satisfy herideas of perfection, had been rash and unjustifiable.  Willoughby wasall that her fancy had delineated in that unhappy hour and in everybrighter period, as capable of attaching her; and his behaviourdeclared his wishes to be in that respect as earnest, as his abilitieswere strong.Her mother too, in whose mind not one speculative thought of theirmarriage had been raised, by his prospect of riches, was led before theend of a week to hope and expect it; and secretly to congratulateherself on having gained two such sons-in-law as Edward and Willoughby.Colonel Brandon's partiality for Marianne, which had so early beendiscovered by his friends, now first became perceptible to Elinor, whenit ceased to be noticed by them.  Their attention and wit were drawnoff to his more fortunate rival; and the raillery which the other hadincurred before any partiality arose, was removed when his feelingsbegan really to call for the ridicule so justly annexed to sensibility.Elinor was obliged, though unwillingly, to believe that the sentimentswhich Mrs. Jennings had assigned him for her own satisfaction, were nowactually excited by her sister; and that however a general resemblanceof disposition between the parties might forward the affection of Mr.Willoughby, an equally striking opposition of character was nohindrance to the regard of Colonel Brandon.  She saw it with concern;for what could a silent man of five and thirty hope, when opposed to avery lively one of five and twenty? and as she could not even wish himsuccessful, she heartily wished him indifferent.  She liked him--in.
